--- Page 1 ---
Republic of the Gambia United Nations Convention
to Combat Desertification
National Drought Plan
GAMBIA – UNCCD DROUGHT INITIATIVE
Ministry of Environment, Climate Change and Natural
Resources, GIEPA Building
Pipeline Road, Gambia
Developed for the
The Drought Task Team
By
1. Mohammed Jaiteh, Focal Point, Drought Initiative
2. Alpha Jallow, UNFCCC Focal Point
3. Dr. Buba Manjang, Medical and Health Services
4. Bubu Pateh Jallow, National Consultant

--- Page 2 ---
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Content Page
No.
Table of Contents i
Forward iv
Appreciations v
Acronyms vi
Executive Summary viii
1: BACKGROUND 1
1.1 Purpose, Scope, Goals and Objectives 2
1.1.1 Purpose 2
1.1.2 Scope 2
1.1.3 Goals 2
1.1.4 Objectives 3
1.2 Plan Development Process 3
2: RELATIONASHIP TO OTHER PLANS AND POLICIES 4
2.1 Related National and Sectoral Policies and Regulations 4
2.1.1 The National Climate Change Policy: 4
2.1.2 The Forestry Policy (2010-2019) and the Forest Regulations: 5
2.1.3 The Environment Policies 5
2.1.4The Agriculture and Natural Resources Policy (2009-2015) 6
2.1.5The Fisheries Policy, Act and Strategic Action Plan 6
2.1.6Water resources policies and regulations 6
2.1.7Tourism policy and regulations 6
2.1.8Health policy and regulations 7
2.1.9Education Policy and regulations 7
2.1.10Disaster Management Policy and Regulations 7
2.1.11Local government, land and physical planning policies and 7
regulations
2.2 Existing Programmes Addressing Issues of Drought 8
2.2.1 National Action Plan to Combat Desertification, Land 8
Degradation & Drought (NAP)
2.2.2 National Adaptation Plan of Action (NAPA) 8
2.2.3 National Biodiversity Strategy Action Plan (NBSAP) 8
2.2.4 National Forestry Action Plan and Strategy (NFAP) 9
2.3 Importance of National Drought Plan 9
3: OVERVIEW OF DROUGHT IN THE COUNTRY 10
3.1 Historical Occurrences 10
3.2 Understanding drought (Meteorological, Agricultural, Hydrological and 11
Socioeconomic Drought)
3.2.1 Meteorological drought 12
3.2.2 Agricultural Drought 12
3.2.3 Hydrological Drought 13
3.2.4 Socioeconomic Drought 13
3.3 Drought Impacts by Sector: 13
i

--- Page 3 ---
3.3.1 Agriculture 13
3.3.2 Livestock 14
3.3.3 Water Resources 15
3.3.4 Socio-economic 16
4: DROUGHT MONITORING, FORECASTING AND IMPACT ASSESSMENT 17
4.1 Drought Indices 17
4.2 Current Monitoring, Forecasting and data collection 17
4.3 Drought severity in all relevant sectors 18
4.4 A Drought Impact Assessment Methodology 18
5: DROUGHT RISK AND VULNERABILITY 19
5.1 The drought Risk and Vulnerability Assessment and GIS Mapping 19
5.2 Drought Risk Areas in Various Administrative areas 20
6: DROUGHT COMMUNICATION AND RESPONSE ACTIONS 23
6.1 Communication Goal and Objectives 23
6.1.1 Objective 1 23
6.1.2 Objective 2 23
6.1.3 Objective 3 24
6.1.4 Objective 4 24
6.2 Drought levels to be included in the Communication 25
6.3 Modes of Communication 26
6.3.1 Peer to Peer Communication 26
6.3.2 Regional contact list 26
6.3.3 Regional conference call or face-to-face Meetings 26
6.4 Declaration of Drought 26
6.5 Communication and Coordination Guidelines 29
6.6 Drought Response Actions 30
6.6.1 Declaration of Drought Conditions 30
7: DROUGHT MITIGATION AND PREPAREDNESS 31
7.1 National Water Resources Monitoring and Impact Assessment 33
7.2 Development of New and Alternative Water Sources 34
7.3 Water Conservation Practices/Public Education Awareness and Outreach 35
7.4 Legislation and Land Use Planning 36
7.4.1 Land Use Change 36
7.4.2 Land Use Policy and Planning 38
7.4.3 Legislature supporting Land Use Planning 39
7.4.4 Land Resource Tenure and Legislation in The Gambia 40
8: THE NATIONAL DROUGHT ACTION PLAN 41
8.1 Priority Implementation Actions 41
8.2 Future Updates and Revisions 53
9: IMPLEMENTATION OF THE NATIONAL DROUGHT ACTION PLAN 54
9.1 Drought Implementation Framework and Future Revision of the Plan 54
9.2 Partnerships and an Integrated Approach 54
9.3 Financing and resourcing the Natioal Drought Plan 55
10: MONITORING, REPORTING AND VERIFICATION 57
11: CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 59
REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING 60
ii

--- Page 4 ---
LIST OF FIGURES Page
No.
Figure 1: Evolution of rainfall indices in the Sahelian countries from 1950 to 2005 10
(Source: AGRHYMET Regional Centres, Niamey, Niger)
Figure 2: Country average rainfall trend from 1943 to 2008 (Source: DWR 2016 11
(community Sensitization on CC)
Figure 3: Proportion of households reporting different types of drought impacts Source: 13
The Gambia Loss and Damage questionnaire survey, July–August 2012.
Figure 4: Current and Projected Rainfall of The Gambia shows decrease especially in the 20
North Bank
Figure 5: Climate Change impacts include less that 600mm of rainfall to be received in 21
The Gambia by 2100
Figure 6: Saline water intrusion upstream due to reduced freshwater recharge to the River 22
and salt water flow from the Ocean into the Estuary of the River due to rising sea level.
Figure 7: Vegetation Map of The Gambia 22
Figure 8: Temporal Changes in Land Use and Land Cover of The Gambia from 1975 37
70m 2013
Figure 9: National land cover baseline map, January 2014 (GoTG/IFAD, 2015) 38
Figure 10: Panchromatic images taken from Earth Observation Satellites 38
List of Tables Page
No.
Table 1: Vulnerability of key sectors to drought hazards 19
Table 2: Summary of the different levels of drought conditions 25
Table 3: Drought Stages, Trigger Point Guidelines and Response Targets 28
Table 4: Showing a drought communication plan 30
Table 5: National and sub-National Agencies and their responsibilities in Drought 32
Management
Table 6: Main tenure types in the Gambia (Amie Bensuda& Co. 2013) 40
Table 7: National Drought Plan 43
iii

--- Page 5 ---
FORWARD
Drought is climate related and according to the World Meteorological Organization (WMO), climate change is
projected to increase the frequency, intensity, and duration of droughts, with impacts on many sectors, in
particularly food, water and energy. The Sahelian zone including The Gambia is particularly prone to drought. There
is the need to develop policies and strategies to address this insidious phenomenon and plan for the humanitarian
and development consequences of the drought related disasters that tighten their grip overtime, gradually destroying
lives and livelihoods. The planning process must move beyond a crisis-driven approach and develop integrated risk-
based national drought plan that provides an integrated overview of activities meeting the national and sub-national
needs and building resilience and sustainable livelihoods.
The Gambia National Meteorological and Hydrological Services (NMHS) in collaboration with other national
partners (MoA, MoHSW, MECCNAR, etc), Regional partners including the AGRHYMET and continental partners
including the African Centre for Meteorological Applications and Development (ACMAD) are making giant strides
to provide timely warnings and forecasts on droughts and other climate hazards to The Gambia. Models have been
developed to monitor rainfall, food crop water requirements satisfaction and prospective yields, the progress of
vegetation front and its different seasonal and inter-annual variations – phenomena that are negatively affected by
drought. Starting from May each year, a monitoring is implemented every 10 days at both regional and national
levels by the multidisciplinary working groups that issue decadal and/or monthly bulletins to inform decision makers
on the evolving agro-pastoral and hydrological situations. Those bulletins contain several chapters, going from the
interpretation of the results of the regional seasonal outlook forum on rainfall and hydrological forecasts, to the
analysis of the rainfall and hydrological situations, the progress of sowing, the assessment of crop water
requirements satisfaction and potential yields using field data and agro-meteorological models, the status of pastures
using vegetation indices, and the estimation of regional cereal/food balance. The information provided serves to
inform policy and decision making on a daily, seasonal and annual basis. The services from these organizations have
evolved from tackling only drought related issues to addressing all climate and climate change hazards, including
climate change impacts and adaptation assessments on agriculture, water resources fisheries and other key sectors of
the economy.
This National Drought Plan is linked to the National Climate Change Policy; the medium-term National
Development Plan (2018-2021); key climate and climate change strategies including the National Adaptation
Programme of Actions (NAPA), the Special Programme for Climate Resilience (SPCR), the Low Emissions Climate
Resilience Development Strategy; the Climate Change Adaptation and Disaster Management (CCADM) and the
National Disaster Management Strategic Action Plan under the National Disaster Management Agency; and the
National Adaptation Plans (NAPs) process at country level. The Action Plan has priority implementation actions
that include (a) establishment of a Technical Drought Action Group; (b) compilation and publication of historical
and current statistical information on drought impacts around the country as a snapshot in time; (c) identification of
future vulnerabilities and impacts across sub-national and national jurisdiction and also across relevant sectors of the
economy; (d) identification, design and operationalization of an environment and climate change data base at the
National Meteorological Agency of The Gambia with nodes at relevant government departments; and (e) design and
implementation of a Comprehensive Water Resources Management Programme for The Gambia.
Monitoring and evaluation of the Plan will be assured with the development and implementation of a Monitoring,
Reporting and Verification Framework.
……………………………………………..
Honourable Minister
Ministry of Environment, Climate Change
and Natural Resources
iv

--- Page 6 ---
APPRECIATIONS
The Ministry of Environment, Climate Change and Natural Resources gratefully acknowledges
the Global Mechanism of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification for the
financial support that made possible the execution of the present study.
Special thanks and appreciation go to the Director of the Department of Forestry who is also the
Focal Point of the Drought Initiative and Mr. Alpha Jallow, the UNFCCC Focal Point for their
effective coordination and, constructive and thoughtful support throughout the project.
The development of this Plan was undertaken by the Drought Task Force that was constituted by
the Director of Forestry and the UNFCCC Focal Point with close collaboration with the National
Consultant
Sincere thanks to the following individuals and institutions for their unwavering support and
collaboration during the study.
 Mohammed Jaiteh, Focal Point, Drought Initiative
 Alpha Jallow, UNFCCC Focal Point
 Dr. Buba Manjang, Medical and Health Services
 Bubu Pateh Jallow, National Consultant
…………………………………………………
Mr. Pateh Jah
Permanent Secretary
Ministry of Environment, Climate Change
and Natural Resources
v

--- Page 7 ---
ACCRONYMS
AFD French Development Agency
AGRHYMET Agriculture, Hydrology, Meteorology
ANR Agriculture and Natural Resources
ANRWG ANR Working Group
ARC Africa Risk Capacity Agency
ASIS Agriculture Stress Index System
CCADRM Climate Change Adaptation and Disaster Risk Management
CED Climate and Environment Division of FAO
CEDAW United Nations Convention on the Elimination of all forms of
Discrimination against Women
CILSS the Inter-state Committee to fight against drought in the Sahel
CND Convention on Biological Diversity
CRR Central River Region
DANIDA Danish International Development Agency
DFID UK Department for International Development
DOA Department of Agriculture
DPWM Department of Parks and Wildlife Management
DRR Disaster Risk Reduction
DWR Department of Water Resources
ECOWAS Economic Community of West African States
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization
GBA Greater Banjul Area
GCF Green Climate Fund
GDP Gross Domestic Product
GEAP Gambia Environmental Action Plan
GIEWS Global Information and Early Warning System
GM Global Mechanism under the UNCCD
GTB Gambia Tourism Board
GWP Global Water Partnership
IDB Islamic Development Bank
IFAD International Fund for Agricultural Development
ISDR International Strategy for Disaster Reduction
JAS July, August and September
KMC Kanifing Municipal Council
LDCF Least Developed Countries Fund
M&E Monitoring and Evaluation
MOA Ministry of Agriculture (MoA)
MECCNAR Ministry of Environment Climate Change and Natural Resources
MoFWRNAM Ministry of Fisheries and Water Resources and National Assembly
vi

--- Page 8 ---
Matters
MoH&SW Ministry of Health and Social Welfare
MRV Monitoring, Reporting and Verification
NaNA National Nutrition Agency
NAP National Action Programme to combat desertification, land degradation &
drought in The Gambia
NAPA National Adaptation Programme of Action on Climate Change
NARI National Agricultural Research Institute
NAWEC National Water and Electricity Corporation
NBR North Bank Region
NBSAP National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan
NCCP National Climate Change Policy
NDMA National Disaster Management Agency
NDP National Development Plan (2018 – 2021)
NEA National Environment Agency
NEMA National Agricultural Land and Water Management Development Project
NEMA National Environmental Management Act
NEMC National Environmental Management Council
NFAP National Forestry Action Plan and Strategy
NFF National Forest Fund
NGO Non-Governmental Organization
OMVG a French acronym for River Gambia Development Authority
PA Protected Area
PAGE Programme for Accelerated Growth and Employment (2012-2015)
PRSP/SPA Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper/Strategy for Poverty Alleviation
PSU Planning Services Unit of the Department of Agriculture
PURA Public Utilities and Regulatory Authority
SCF Special Climate Funjd
TAG Technical Advisory Group
TDA Tourism Development Area
TVET Technical and Vocational Education and Training
UNCCD United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification
UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
WB World Bank Group
WCR West Coast Region
WFP World Food Programme
WSI Water Supply Index
vii

--- Page 9 ---
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Drought is a slow onset disaster that tightens its grip over time. In most cases drought is a lack of rainfall leading to
inadequate water supply for plants, animals and human beings, can inflict devastating effects on life and livelihoods
and may result in food insecurity, famine, malnutrition, epidemics and displacement of populations. It also
significantly impacts sectors such as agriculture, livestock and water resources with serious ramification to socio-
economic and livelihood activities. The IPCC reports that climate change is projected to increase the frequency,
intensity, and duration of droughts, with impacts on many sectors, in particularly food, water and energy.
The Gambia experienced the drought of the 1970s and the subsequent droughts and low rainfalls/variable seasons
that followed to up recent years. The impacts experienced differ from year to year and also across the country.
These impacts ranged from loss of crops, hunger, malnutrition, increased poverty, loss of animals, reduced surface
water availability (lakes, ponds), increased urban migration and reduced national economic performance.
At UNCCD COP-13, the UNCCD institutions and bodies were requested to implement a drought initiative in the
biennium 2018-2019 at national level. A key element of the initiative is to support countries build drought resilience
by implementing concrete actions for drought preparedness. The intent is to boost the resilience of people,
communities and ecosystems against drought by being prepared and acting early. The preparation of this document
is funded by the UNCCD to meet request of the above, with the main objective of responding to international
initiatives and having in the Gambia a national drought plan which can respond at any time in the event of drought
or extremely low rainfalls.
National and sectoral policies and regulations related to the drought initiative in The Gambia include the ‘The
Gambia Incorporated Vision 2020)’ to which all the legislation, policies and strategies in place in The Gambia that
are aligned. The national and sectoral medium term strategies are developed with the objectives of implementing the
VISION 2020.
The National Climate Change Policy sets out comprehensive and crosscutting policy directions to implement
national development strategies in a climate-resilient manner, drawing on all sectors of the population in a spirit of
partnership and collaboration. The Forestry Policy and Regulations have the principal objective of checking land
degradation, in order to restore the natural balance and sustain the production and use of forest resources. The
Climate Change and Forest policies recognize government’s strategic shift towards poverty reduction and economic
growth, which underpins vision 2020, the Gambia Environment Action Plan, Local Government Reforms and
Decentralization, Strategy for Poverty Alleviation II (Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper), National Action on
Desertification, etc. The provisions will accommodate government’s decentralization process; and demand driven
“bottom-up approach” strategy of the Local Government Act, 2002. This Act places management responsibilities on
the Local Government Area Councils for a range of natural resources under their jurisdiction. The Water resources
policies and regulations make provisions to promote the (a) centralized inventory and management of all water
resources in the country; (b) most rational use of the available water resources, including the abatement of its
harmful effects such as flooding, soil erosion, siltation and salinisation; and (c) preparation of sectoral water plans,
sub-basin plans, basin and master water plans to serve as terms of reference for allocating sectoral uses of water.
The Health Sector Emergency Preparedness and Response Plan Related to All Hazards (2017 - 2019) addresses a
number of climate related hazards as well as underlining the cross-sectoral cooperation in addressing health sector
hazards (drought, floods, bush fires, windstorms, locust invasions, environmental degradation and epidemics), many
of which could be construed as being climate-change related. The Women’s Act enshrines the right of every woman
to live in a healthy and sustainable environment and that The Government shall take appropriate measures to
mensure greater participation of women in the planning, management and preservation of the environment and the
sustainable use of natural resources at all levels. The Strategic Action Plan for the Disaster Management
Programme (2008-2011) has an overall vision: Assurance of safer and resilient communities in which the impact of
viii

--- Page 10 ---
hazards would not hamper development and the ecosystem and provision for a better quality of life will be achieved
through effective emergency and disaster services; with, as policy goal: to ensure a proper and effective mechanism
for disaster mitigation and preparedness that will save lives and livelihoods in the country. The parks and wildlife
sub-sector policy will be addressing the underlying causes of biodiversity loss through greater and systematic
involvement of the population, in particular satellite local communities, in their effective management and the
specific parks and wildlife policy goal will continue to be the expansion of protected areas coverage of 10% of total
surface area.
In this Drought Plan, management is centered around (a) risk identification based on baseline knowledge on
hazards, vulnerabilities and priorities at any given level; (b) monitoring on how those risks and vulnerabilities
change through time; (c) response capability of potentially affected communities that enables them to reduce risk
once trends are spotted and announced through, for example, pre-season mitigation activities, evacuation or duck-
and-cover reflexes; and (d) warning communication, whereby the monitoring information is packaged into
actionable messages understood by those that need, and are prepared, to hear them. In The Gambia there is the
Multidisciplinary Working Group (MWG) that technically monitors and reports on the weather and climate of the
season. The National Meteorological Agency provides valuable information on climate science in the country, other
sectors, such as Agriculture, Livestock, Forestry, Fisheries and Health also provide valuable monitoring and
warning data and information which is packages and used to develop the 10-day National Agro-meteorological
Bulletin. The National Disaster Management Agency unpacks the Bulletin and develops the relevant warming
communication and provides the same to the National Disaster Management Forum which is the policy body
responsible for the declaration and dissemination of disaster communication including drought incidence,
continuation and termination.
The Republic of The Gambia is ill prepared for droughts and other disasters, especially under a warming climate.
Some of the issues on the current status of the country on drought preparedness include (a) low institution
capacities and resources of the existing Government bodies to deal with drought issues; (b) often drought/crop
failures responses are coordinated through several Agencies, both Governmental and Non-Governmental with little
central coordination; (c) inventions in terms of reliefs/aids are directed toward human relief and recovery with little
or no post-drought/crop failures evaluation of responses undertaken; (d) None existence of a formal drought/crop
failure contingency plan; (e) the current early warnings can serve drought and famine but need to be instituted in a
national drought policy (which does not exist) and a drought plan; and (f) drought/crop failure mitigation actions
mainly focus on economic and crop diversification and poverty reduction measures, increasingly viewed as part of
the development process with drought policy lacking.
The current water sources of the country are three; atmospheric rain water, surface river water and groundwater.
These sources rely very much on the weather and climate parameters, particularly, rainfall. The availability of
freshwater in the river is influenced by movement of salt water from the ocean into the estuary of the river which is
dependent on the amount rain available during the rainy season. Rainfall is the only means of recharge of surface
and groundwater sources. Hence, any prolonged drought or deficient rainfall has the potential to affect these two
water sources with serious consequences that can lead to water scarcity and the resulting hardship with probable
conflicts.
Because all droughts arise from inadequate or lack of water, effective assessment and monitoring of the national
water resources will be essential. Assessment and monitoring programs should be developed according to different
risk scenarios for each locality; however, some actions must be guaranteed during drought situations. Emergency
situations such as droughts lead to discussions about universal access to safe water and sanitation, the use of new
technologies to minimize waste, water treatment in emergencies, and water saving measures. Wells (some
traditional, some modern concrete line wells) and boreholes (shallow and deep) are the main means of abstracting
ground water for public and private uses.
ix

--- Page 11 ---
Hence the need to develop new and alternative water sources is essential as a way of mitigating drought and
deficient rainfall in the country through rain water harvesting from roof tops in residential areas; rain water
harvesting from surface run-off through creation of reservoirs in low-land areas in the country; and improvement of
potable water supply infrastructures in both urban and rural settlements.
This National Drought Plan thus contains a Drought Action Plan with priority implementation actions. A variety of
strategies and actions contained therein will pursue and improve the resilience of the country’s economy especially
the sectors (agriculture, water resources, fisheries, forestry, parks and wildlife, etc) that are climate and rainfall
dependent. These investments must be made as part of a comprehensive plan that includes, for the water resources
sector, expanded water conservation, water recycling, storm water capture and reuse, local and regional water
storage, groundwater management and other strategies to ensure water supply reliability and ecosystem health in
The Gambia. For the forestry and parks systems, tree growing using indigenous trees which are climate and climate
change resilient would work under harsh conditions including droughts.
The following key actions are relevant to the development and implementation of the Gambia National Drought
Plan.
1. Establish a Technical Drought Action Group to share information and develop recommendations to address the
current and prepare for future drought conditions under projected climate change;
2. Compile and publish historical and current statistical information on drought impacts around the country as a
snapshot in time;
3. Under scenarios of continuing and future (e.g. 10, 15 or 20 years) drought conditions, identify future
vulnerabilities and impacts across sub-national and national jurisdiction and also across relevant sectors of the
economy (water, agriculture, forests, wildlife protection, ecosystems, commercial industries, trade, etc.)
4. Design and operationalize an Environment and Climate Change Data Base at the National Meteorological
Agency of The Gambia with Nodes at relevant departments that include National Environment Agency,
National Disaster Management Agency, Department of Agriculture, Department of Forestry, Department of
Parks and Wildlife Management, Department of Water Resources, Department of Livestock Services,
Department of Fisheries and Department of Health Services.
5. Design and implement a Comprehensive Water Resources Management Programme for The Gambia that will
respond to current climate and climate change related drought conditions at the sectoral, sub-national and
national levels.
5.1. Conduct a comprehensive study with results to inform the process of updating all natural resources and
other relevant policies and regulations and facilitate long-term solutions for sustainability in the applicable
natural resources, particularly, water management plans;
5.2. Update the National Water Resources Master Plan including the design, promotion, facilitation and
encouragement of innovative water supply technologies such as irrigation that may be needed under a
water-stressed economy due to projected climate change.
5.3. Policy and institutional reforms in the water resources sector (e.g., relocation of abstraction points,
changes in pumping policies of deep wells and boreholes, flow regulation, licensing and permits for
withdrawal of river water for irrigation and increase water column in wells)
5.4. Creation of new surface and groundwater storage and improved distribution systems at the Municipal and
Regional Administrative levels to help address the nation’s projected stresses in the surface and
groundwater resources under changing climate related drought conditions.
5.5. Development and implementation of medium and long-term water infrastructure and technology plans and
strategies to ensure reliable and sustainable water supplies for both the economy and the environment; and
improvement of distribution at the Municipal and Regional Administrative levels.
x

--- Page 12 ---
1. BACKGROUND
The Gambia is part of the Sahelian Region of West Africa and shared the same climate pattern of
the sub-region which differs from south to north. The Gambia as part of the Sahel region has
experienced three types of rainfall periods from 1950s to recent years. These periods are 1950s to
1968/69, 1970 to 1993 and from 1994 to recent years; the second period from 1970 – 1993, was
when most severe droughts were experienced in the sub-region. For simple understanding,
drought is generally defined as an extended period (a season, a year, or several years) of deficient
precipitation compared to the statistical multi-year average for a region that results in water
shortage for some activity, group, or environmental sector. Drought affects all parts of our
society, from food production to public health, and there is a growing need to help countries,
communities, agriculture, businesses, and individuals threatened by drought to plan accordingly.
Drought gives rise to series of environmental, ecological, social and economical impacts. It also
significantly impacts sectors such as agriculture, livestock and water resources with serious
ramification to socio-economic and livelihood activities.
The Gambia experienced the drought of the 1970s and the subsequent droughts and low
rainfalls/variable seasons that followed to up recent years. The impacts experienced differ from
year to year and also across the country. These impacts ranged from loss of crops, hunger,
malnutrition, increased poverty, loss of animals, reduced surface water availability (lakes,
ponds), increased urban migration and reduced national economic performance.
Nationally, to minimize or mitigate the impact of drought in the country, several initiatives were
taken at national level. New crop varieties were introduced both on cereals (millet, sorghum,
sesame) and groundnuts (cash crop) which are of short cycle and more drought-tolerant. The
cultivation of water melon and agroforestry was introduced and encouraged across the country.
At institutional level, the National Agricultural Research Institute (NARI) and National Disaster
Management Agency (NDMA) were established. The first was spearhead agricultural research
into new crop varieties and farming practices in the face droughts and low rainfalls, the latter is
tasked to manage natural disaster response measures and interventions.
Regionally, the Inter-state Committee to fight against drought in the Sahel (CILSS) and its
training Centre; AGRHYMET (Agriculture, Hydrology, Meteorology) were established with
headquarters in Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso and Niamey , Niger respectively. The first was to
coordinate at political level interventions on combating the impacts of droughts in the sub-region
and second is to conduct trainings for citizens of CILSS in the fields of Agrometeorology,
Hydrology, Crop Protection and instruments and computer with aim of building national
capacities in responding to the impacts of drought at national level.
Internationally, at the Conference of the Parties by its decision 29/COP.13), the UNCCD
institutions and bodies are requested to implement a drought initiative in the biennium 2018-
1

--- Page 13 ---
2019 at national level. A key element of the initiative will be to help countries build drought
resilience by implementing concrete actions for drought preparedness. The intent is to boost the
resilience of people, communities and ecosystems against drought by being prepared and acting
early.
The preparation of this document is funded by the UNCCD to meet request of the above, with
the main objective of responding to international initiatives and having in the Gambia a national
drought plan which can respond at any time in the event of drought or extremely low rainfalls.
1.1 Purpose, Scope, Goals and Objectives
1.1.1 Purpose
The purpose of this plan is to provide a national mechanism whereby, Government and
stakeholders, both national and international can effectively and systematically assess drought
conditions, develop mitigation actions and programs to reduce risk in advance of drought, and
develop response options/actions that minimize economic losses/stresses, environmental losses
and social hardships during drought.
1.1.2 Scope
The scope of the plan is national, covering the whole country and all sectors. It will have an
implementation institutional arrangement from high level in Government (Office of the
President/Vice President) to technical level (technical institutions) with an institutional focal
point.
1.1.3 Goals
The overall goal is to enable the country to prepare itself in responding to disasters, particularly
droughts with regards to assessing, risk based national drought management policies and
interventions. The specific goals are:
i. Setting a functioning National Drought Taskforce responsible the implementation of the
National Drought Plan;
ii. Identifying and setting National Office with authority to declare drought and authorizing
resources mobilization and intervention actions;
iii. Formulate/strengthen national policies on natural disasters, particularly droughts with
good management strategies;
iv. Strengthen key institutions on capacity needs (human, material) from national to local
levels in implementing the drought plan implementing risk based management;
v. Establishing a national Drought Monitoring and Early Warning Systems
vi. Setting an Emergency Relief and Response mechanism
2

--- Page 14 ---
1.1.4 Objectives
Generally, the objective of this plan, is to provide Government in collaboration with national and
international partners with an effective and systematic means of assessing drought conditions,
developing mitigation actions and programs to reduce risk in advance of drought, and developing
response options/actions that minimize economic losses/stresses, environmental losses and social
hardships during drought. Specifically, the objectives of the plan will be following:
i. Collect, analyze and disseminate drought-related information in a timely and
systematic manner.
ii. Establish criteria for declaring drought and triggering various mitigation and response
activities.
iii. Provide an organizational structure that assures information flows between and within
levels of government, as well as with Non Governmental organizations, and define
the duties and responsibilities of all agencies with respect to drought.
iv. Maintain a current inventory of drought assistance programs used in assessing and
responding to drought emergencies, and provide a set of appropriate action
recommendations.
v. Identify drought prone areas and vulnerable sectors, population groups, and
environments.
vi. Identify mitigation actions that can be taken to address vulnerabilities and reduce
drought impacts.
vii. Provide a mechanism to ensure timely and accurate assessments of drought’s impacts
on key sectors and other areas, as well as specific population groups.
viii. Keep the public informed of current conditions and response actions by providing
accurate, timely information to media in print and electronic form.
ix. Establish and pursue a strategy to remove obstacles to the equitable allocation of
water during shortages and provide incentives to encourage water conservation.
x. Establish a set of procedures to continually evaluate and periodically revise the plan
so it will stay responsive to the needs of the people and government ministries.
1.2 Plan Development Process
The steps in the drought policy and preparedness process are:
Step 1: Appoint a National Drought Plan Task Force
Step 2: Define the Goals/Objectives of the Drought Plan
Step 3: Seek Stakeholder Participation
Step 4: Inventory/Situational Analysis
Step 5: Prepare/write the National drought Plan
Step 6: Identify unmet needs and fill institutional gap
Step 7: Communicate /Educate
Step 8: Evaluate the plan
3

--- Page 15 ---
2. RELATIONASHIP TO OTHER PLANS AND POLICIES
2.1 Related National and Sectoral Policies and Regulations
In 1996, the Government adopted a long-term strategy for accelerated and sustainable
development, ‘The Gambia Incorporated Vision 2020 (see BOX below)’in order to transform
The Gambia into a middle-income nation. The Gambia’s medium-term strategies (PRSP/SPA,
PAGE and NDP) have been developed with implementation modalities for Vision 2020. Under
this section, the legislation, policies and strategies in place in The Gambia that are aligned to the
VISON 2020 and the medium strategies and that are directly or indirectly related to addressing
climate change and drought management are discussed. Much of the legislation in The Gambia
pre-dates climate change awareness. The sectoral silos have hampered mainstreaming climate
change, with the tendency to leave everything to do with environment and climate change to the
MoECCNAR, without necessarily seeing these challenges as being cross-sectoral. While climate
change is now being addressed in new draft legislation (e.g. water resources) and in strategies
(e.g. agriculture and natural resources; forestry), existing legislation – where it addresses the
topic at all –is mostly restricted to environmental impact assessments of a very limited nature.
Changes in this would require changes in the National Environment Management Act and its
associated regulations to move from a requirement that an environmental impact assessment
determines whether a project will have “any adverse impact on the environment” to a
requirement to specifically address climate change as part of the long-term, multi-sectoral
impacts of an intervention, and to include provisions for enforcement. For example, there are
presently numerous user conflicts between different stakeholders with respect to the management
of coastal resources such as fisheries, mining of minerals (sand, ilmenite), agriculture and
forestry.
Vision 2020: The long term objectives of Vision 2020 are to address poor savings through improvements in
output from the real sectors and enhancing financial intermediation. A liberal market economy with undue
administrative interference shall improve the overall efficiency and competitiveness of the Gambian economy.
The role of Government shall be limited strictly to the production of public goods which cannot be produced by
the private sector while conducting a vigorous decentralization drive to ensure a more democratic process in the
allocation, management and control of resources.
2.1.1 The National Climate Change Policy:
The National Climate Change Policy (NCCP) represents a significant step forward, with many
progressive and necessary provisions designed to ensure a coherent and effective approach to
reducing vulnerability to climate change and building adaptive capacity and resilience. There is
inadequate consideration of climate change in sector policies, while skills and capacity levels to
4

--- Page 16 ---
mainstream and decentralize the climate change response are insufficient. It is therefore clear
that an overarching policy framework is needed to steer the transition to a climate-resilient
society, within a thriving low-emissions economy. This NCCP has the intention to provide the
framework for managing climate risks, building institutions and capacities, and identifying new
opportunities for climate-resilient sustainable development in The Gambia. It sets out
comprehensive and crosscutting policy directions to implement national development strategies
in a climate-resilient manner, drawing on all sectors of the population in a spirit of partnership
and collaboration. This National Drought Plan is thus aligned to and will support the
implementation of the NCCP, both geared towards climate resilience and transitioning The
Gambia from current brown to green economy.
2.1.2 The Forestry Policy (2010-2019) and the Forest Regulations:
The Government recognized the prospects of a balanced ecosystem in advancing the
socioeconomic development of the country. The policy framework for sustainable natural
resource management put an adequate forest cover at the centre front. The preceding Forest
Policy (1995 – 2005), proclaims that, a forest cover of 30% and placing 75% of the forest cover
under local community and private sector management is sufficient for maintaining an ecological
balance necessary for sustainable economic growth. However, the implementation of the 1995-
2005 forest policy faced the following critical constraints: (a) increasing population pressure on
land resources, and the inability of the natural resource sector to meet the increasing resource
demand; (b) the inability of various users to take full responsibility of balancing supply and
demand for forest resources; (c) inaccessibility to land and difficulties in securing extended
tenure (to match the long-term benefits of investment in forest resource development) for private
foresters; (d) poor marketing system for forest products; (e) inability to stimulate adequate
private sector response to investment possibilities in forestry; (f) inadequate capacity of the
institutional framework to sufficiently advance the sector; and (g) inadequate consideration of
climate issues in the policy design. This National Drought Plan is designed to apply adequate
remedial and protective measures in a systematic manner to sustain a sound forest resource base
for meeting the specific needs of the local population and to highlight the impacts of ongoing
climate change on forests, and the critical need to reduce deforestation and enhance ecosystem
resilience, in the face of climate change.
2.1.3 The Environment Policy and Regulations
Environmental Acts, such as the National Environmental Management Act of 1994 focus on
conservation, pollution control, and environmental impact studies, rather than incorporating any
aspect related to climate change. In this regard, environmental management policy is based on
sound partnership among the farming community, the private and public sectors in the effective
implementation of the Gambia Environmental Action Plan (GEAP).
5

--- Page 17 ---
2.1.4 The Agriculture and Natural Resources Policy (2009-2015)
The Agriculture and Natural Resources Policy (2009-2015), which was revised in 2013 to
integrate climate change issues systematically, including the highlighting risks to food and cash
crops, as well as livestock, from future climate change effects, as well as negative impacts to
natural (terrestrial and aquatic) ecosystems, with mangroves and grasslands being negatively
affected. The National Drought Plan is aligned to this policy and is expected support the
sustainable management of water system for effective response to climate and climate change.
2.1.5 The Fisheries Policy and Strategic Plan (2012 – 2015):
The Climate Change-Integrated Fisheries Strategic Action Plan (2012-2015) was reviewed in
2013 to place more emphasis on anticipated climatic impacts on fisheries and other aquatic
systems, and to propose a number of adaptation response measures. Significantly, although
women and female-headed households are the main work-force in agriculture and should be a
key focus of “rural resilience” efforts, gender is not significantly mainstreamed into the existing
ANR policy’s sub-sector policies and strategies, even though in its discussion on cross-cutting
issues the Policy does recognize a number of key constraints facing women: access to land and
land rights; lack of collateral to access credit, limited access to formal markets, lack of market
information and access to inputs, etc.
2.1.6 Water resources policies and regulations
Three new Draft Water Bills awaiting formal approval and enactment have been prepared which
address The Gambia’s water resources within the context of climate change. The Water Act will
ensure protection and management of the nation’s water resources, look to the needs of future
generations and promote the efficient and sustainable use of the resource for the future, and
enshrine the equal treatment of women, and public participation in decision-making. The OMVG
Convention does not seem to apply to groundwater connected to the basin’s surface waters and
fails to incorporate substantive obligations related to harm prevention and equitable use. These
issues will be discussed and remedied in the proposed National Drought Plan.
2.1.7 Tourism policy and regulations
The Gambia Tourism Board Act of makes no mention of any environmental responsibilities
and is completely silent on climate change. Therefore, changes in Physical Planning regulations
and NAWEC regulations would also apply to future building and construction works. The
regulations do specify requirements pertaining to erosion control and drainage (Section 13) but
only to “stabilize ground surfaces at the risk of wind, runoff or wave erosion”, and to maintain
major drainage channels “in conformity with public health regulations”. No mention is made of
climate proofing (whether related to sea-level rise, extreme weather events, flooding, etc.) and
thus this proposed National Drought Plan includes issues related to climate change extreme
events.
6

--- Page 18 ---
2.1.8 Health policy and regulations
The National Health Policy (2012-2020) had been reviewed to incorporate climate change
issues. The potential health impacts of climate change such as vector-borne and zoonotic
diseases (malaria, yellow fever, dengue, etc.), water-borne diseases (cholera, schistosomiasis,
etc.) and weather-related morbidity and mortality (as a result of extreme weather events) are now
integrated into policy. The updated Health Sector Emergency Preparedness and Response
Plan Related to All Hazards (2017 - 2019) was reviewed in 2018 to address a number of
climate related hazards as well as underlining the cross-sectoral cooperation in addressing health
sector hazards (drought, floods, bush fires, windstorms, locust invasions, environmental
degradation and epidemics) Many of these issues will be taken care of in the proposed National
Drought Plan.
2.1.9 Education Policy and regulations
Education, at Basic, Secondary and Tertiary level falls under the Ministry of Basic and
Secondary Education, and the Ministry of Higher Education, Research and Technology. The
Education Policy (2016-2030) notes that (a) there is urgent need for young people to be
equipped with the necessary knowledge, skills and attitudes to be able to address the challenges
triggered by climate change resulting to global warming and sea level rise; coastal and marine
degradation, loss of biodiversity, and issues of waste and waste management; and (b) considering
the need to prepare the youth for adaptation to the effects of climate change, and to engage them
with a view to a proactive, conscious and relevant response to the profound changes taking place
on the West African coastline, the education sector will partner with the relevant stakeholders to
push forward environmental education, including its integration in school curricula. This
National Drought Plan prioritizes and supports some of these issues.
2.1.10 Disaster Management Policy and Regulations
The Strategic National Action Plan (2014-2017) – Strengthening Disaster Risk Reduction and
Management in The Gambia specifically recognized the need to integrate climate change
adaptation with disaster risk management, and is committed to develop risk assessment and risk
modeling tools, including drawing on technical assistance from international partners (World
Bank, ECOWAS, ISDR and the Africa Risk Capacity Agency and in close collaboration with the
private sector and insurance industry) to develop innovative and sustainable strategies of disaster
risk financing. Key areas for intervention in order to promote resilient development include the
enforcement of DRR measures in land-use planning and building regulations and standards. This
National Drought Plan will align to and support inclusive disaster management activities related
to hydrological events, especially drought incidence and management.
2.1.11 Local government, land and physical planning policies and regulations
Building codes and regulations fall under the Ministry of Local Government and its Physical
Planning Department, and are part of a series of measures requiring urgent action to underpin
7

--- Page 19 ---
climate resilience. Action to update and climate proof building standards, energy codes, etc., is
being undertaken jointly between the Ministry of Local Government and The Gambia’s
Standards Bureau. However, work has only recently started on this and the process is still in its
early stages. The process will need validation as well as integration into legal frameworks such
as the Local Government Act and the Physical Planning and Control Act.
2.2 Existing Programmes Addressing Issues of Drought
2.2.1 National Action Plan to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation
& Drought (NAP)
The National Action Programme (NAP) to combat desertification, land degradation & drought in
The Gambia developed by the Ministry of Environment, Climate Change and Natural Resources
(MECCNAR) in 2015 underscored the importance of Sustainable Land Management (SLM) and
land degradation. It is perceived that the degradation of the land-based resources in The Gambia
is a compounded economic, environmental, ecological and cultural problem that requires
collective actions. In that context, and in an even broader sense, the process must be understood
as a social problem in which land degradation and desertification are at the center of a triangular
relationship between people, poverty and food security.
2.2.2 National Adaptation Plan of Action (NAPA)
The development of the National Adaptation Programme of Action on Climate Change (NAPA)
the Gambia was developed in 2007 emphasizing the importance the state attaches to the threat
from climate variability and climate change. The First National Communication of The Gambia
to UNFCCC 2003, captured the potential impacts of climate change on the socio-economic
sectors of the country are mostly negative and therefore the populations are vulnerable. The
Government of The Gambia has recognized the need for action in containing the threat and has
taken bold steps to this effect.
2.2.3 National Biodiversity Strategy Action Plan (NBSAP)
The Gambia has prepared this National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan (GBSAP) in 1998
to fulfill one of the key obligations under Article 6 of the Convention on Biological Diversity
(CBD). The GBSAP sets out a strategy for action under the following main headings; forestry
and forest biodiversity, fisheries and aquatic ecosystems; wildlife, wetlands, agricultural
biodiversity, livestock, geology and water resources, policies and legislation, international
agreements and social and cultural aspects of biodiversity. The Action Plan recognizes that much
of biodiversity loss in The Gambia, as elsewhere, is due to economic policy distortions and the
resultant poverty that encourage rapid over exploitation of biological resources rather than
sustainable use. It also recognizes that slowing down the rate of biodiversity loss will require
8

--- Page 20 ---
policy and institutional reform as well as institutional strengthening for effective action in all the
areas.
2.2.4 National Forestry Action Plan and Strategy (NFAP)
The new National Forestry Action Plan and Strategy (NFAP) developed in 2018 came into being
after the 2001-2010 plan was reviewed and validated in 2018. The primary purpose of the plan is
to provide practical guidance on the implementation of programmes of sustainable dry land
forest management and rehabilitation. It provides a programme direction in sustainable dry land
forest management to make the forest sector more biodiversity-friendly, and socially beneficial.
It addresses the linkages between forestry, biodiversity, and poverty reduction, showing their
complementarities in sustainable economic development.
2.3 Importance of National Drought Plan
 The NDP is a measure to reduce the risk and effects of drought in the Gambia.
 Learned about causes and pattern of drought in the Sahel region.
 To know drought nature and impacts
 Help protect livestock and environmental drought related disasters
 Help coordinate all activities towards drought mitigation
9

--- Page 21 ---
3. OVERVIEW OF DROUGHT IN THE COUNTRY
3.1 Historical Occurrences
The Gambia is part of the Sahelian Region of West Africa and shared the same climate pattern of
the sub-region which differs from south to north. The Sahel has experienced three types of
rainfall periods from 1950s to recent years. These periods are 1950s to 1968/69, 1970 to 1993
and from 1994 to recent years. The first period consist of persistent humid years (Figure 1
below) with positive rainfall (anomaly) indices with abundant precipitations throughout the
period. The second period from 1970 to 1993 persistently consists of dry years (negative
anomaly), which resulted in the droughts years of 1970s to 1993 in Sahel, the severity of which
differs from year to year affecting people and livestock. The Gambia was not spared in the these
droughts and low/erratic rainfalls, which has dropped the productivity of certain crops and led to
changes in the cropping pattern and the introduction of new short cycle crop varieties in the in
the late 1970s to early 1980s. The third period from 1994 to recent years is a period that neither
continuous humid or dry years, but an alternation between the two. However, this alternation is
largely attributed to the effects of climate change on the climate systems of the sub-region.
Figure 1: Evolution of rainfall (anomaly) indices in the Sahelian countries from 1950 to 2005
Source: AGRHYMET Regional Centres, Niamey, Niger.
Across these three periods the country has witnessed a gradual decline in annual rainfall
averages (Figure 2a below) of 5.75mm of rainfall per year, amounting to a decline of about
368.0mm in 64 years as the influence of climate change gradually sets in with all its adverse
impacts on the environment and its socio-economic activities. The decline with exceptional
years of drought is markedly visible from the graph, from a maximum annual average of
1484.7mm to a low of 513.1mm in 2003 and further a bit above this value in 2002, with a repeat
of the scenario in the 2011 Figure 2b below). Other droughts years were earlier in 1972, 1983-
1985, 1990-1993, 1996-1998 and 2002. These years recorded average annual rainfall values of
less that 600mm and were designated droughts years with severe impacts on the agricultural
10

--- Page 22 ---
production, livelihoods and overall economic performance of the country. The 1982 rainy season
remains the worst drought year since the start of records in The Gambia.
1620
1,484.7
1420
1220
513.1
1020
820
620
420
220
20
Figure 2a: Country average rainfall trend from 1943 to 2008 Figure 2b: Country average rainfall trend from 1981 to 2010
(Source: DWR 2016 (community Sensitization on CC) (Source: DWR 2016 (community Sensitization on CC)
Within the period of 1994 to date, The Gambia has experienced a number of alternation between
humid years (above normal rainfall) adequate rains (normal rainfall) and low rainfall (below
normal rainfall). During the low rainfall period the pattern became unpredictable and unreliable
combined with early/late unset of rains, inadequate distribution of rains sometimes erratic in
nature. The 2011 season was a near drought year due to its inadequacy and uneven distribution
of rains affecting agricultural production leading to the Government declaring the year a crop
failure year impacting seriously on the GDP growth and economic performance. Predicted long-
term trends in drought and rainfall variability are reported for The Gambia, which suggests that
The Gambia is highly vulnerable to loss and damage from climate change, particularly from
climate extreme events such as droughts.
3.2 Understanding drought: Meteorological, Agricultural, Hydrological
and Socioeconomic Drought
For simple understanding, drought is generally defined as an extended period; a season, a year,
or several years of deficient precipitation compared to the statistical multi-year average for a
region that results in water shortage for some activity, group, or environmental sector.
Meanwhile, dozens of more specific drought definitions are used around the world according to
the lack of rain over various time periods, or measured impacts such as reservoir levels or crop
losses. Drought can be defined according to meteorological, agricultural, hydrological, and
socio-economic criteria1. Usually drought indices are commonly used as proxies for monitoring
water availability in an area. The indices which are used to define departures from normal
conditions include (1) meteorological drought indices that identify periods with below-normal
1http://www.fao.org/docrep/017/aq191e/aq191e.pdf
11
)sretemillim(
llafniaR
3491 6491 9491 2591 5591 8591 1691 4691 7691 0791 3791 6791 9791 2891 5891 8891 1991 4991 7991 0002 3002 6002
1200
1000
800
600 632648
576 597596 575 537531 543519 400 459 486
348
200
0
)mm(
llafniar
naem
launnA
Year

--- Page 23 ---
precipitation and above-normal precipitation; (2) agricultural drought indices that define periods
with dry soils resulting from below-average precipitation, intense but less frequent rain events, or
above-normal evaporation, all of which lead to reduced crop production and plant growth; and
(3) hydrological drought indices that define periods when river stream flow and water storage in
aquifers, lakes, or reservoirs fall below long-term mean levels. In quantifying meteorological
drought indices, precipitation is the primary variable and surface air temperature is the secondary
factor; soil moisture content and stream flow data are the primary variables used in estimating
the agricultural and hydrological drought indices, respectively (Mannocchi, F & Francesca,
Todisco &Vergni, Lorenzo, 2004).
3.2.1 Meteorological drought
Meteorological drought is known when precipitation is compared to a long-term normal in terms
of departures from the normal. In essence, Meteorological drought is defined usually comparing
the precipitation of a precise place and moment to the average of precipitation of that place for a
long period (normal). This is why the definition is specific to each region. Meteorological
drought results in depletion of soil moisture that almost always has an impact on crop
production. In consideration here, is only the objective factor of reduction of precipitation, not
taking into account the effects of that reduction on water reservoirs, human needs or agriculture2.
3.2.2 Agricultural Drought
Agricultural drought in short, when there is insufficient soil moisture to meet the needs of a
particular crop at a particular time. Agricultural drought is typically evident after meteorological
drought but before a hydrological drought. It occurs when there is not enough water available
for a particular crop or crops to grow during a particular time within a region or country.
An agricultural drought is considered to have set in when the soil moisture availability to plants
has dropped to such a level that it adversely affects the crop yield and hence agricultural
profitability. In brief, the definition of agricultural drought is concerned with the soil moisture
deficiency in relation to meteorological droughts and climatic factors and their impacts on
agricultural production and economic profitability3. Agricultural drought is typically evident
after meteorological drought (when rainfall decreases) but before a hydrological drought (when
the level of rivers, lakes and reservoirs decreases)4.
Furthermore, it is important to note that the effects of droughts are different in irrigated and non-
irrigated agriculture. In the first one the impacts are usually lower as it depends on stocks of
water (reservoirs), so in case of not having precipitations, these crops still get the water they
need, in the second case, crops depend directly on water falling as precipitations, if these are
2http://klimat.czn.uj.edu.pl/enid/3__Drought_in_the_Mediterranean/-_causes___types_of_drought_184.html
3https://www.researchgate.net/publication/289389232_Agricultural_drought_Indices_definition_and_analysis
4http://klimat.czn.uj.edu.pl/enid/3__Drought_in_the_Mediterranean/_causes___types_of_drought_184.html
12

--- Page 24 ---
reduced, they don’t get the water they need to survive5. This drought may not depend only in the
amount of rainfall, but also on the correct use of that water. Imagine there is a period of low
rainfall and also water is not used in the correct way for irrigation and other uses, then the
problem becomes even bigger than it was before.
3.2.3 Hydrological Drought
Hydrological drought refers to when shortages/deficiencies of water resources: surface and
subsurface water supplies occur, when for example; groundwater, reservoir, or stream levels are
significantly reduced. This is considered the drinking water type of drought. Conditions for
hydrologic drought are built over extended periods of time. It takes a longer time for reservoirs
or streams to become depleted, which corresponds to longer replenishing periods6.
3.2.4 Socioeconomic Drought
This of type drought occurs when human activities are affected by reduced precipitation and
related water availability. This form of drought associates human activities with elements of
meteorological, agricultural, and hydrological drought
3.3 Drought Impacts by Sector:
3.3.1 Agriculture
Drought impacts agricultural production and quality of agricultural product. The figure below
(Figure 3) shows the proportion of households reporting drought impact of 2011 the North Bank
Region of the Gambia. From the table, it is clear that most household’s crops and livestock were
severely affected by the drought pushing food prices very high in the region.
Figure 3: Proportion of households reporting different types of drought impacts
Source: The Gambia Loss and Damage questionnaire survey, July–August 2012.
5http://klimat.czn.uj.edu.pl/enid/3__Drought_in_the_Mediterranean/-_causes___types_of_drought_184.html
6https://articles.extension.org/pages/64791/what-is-hydrological-drought
13

--- Page 25 ---
Drought or substantial dry periods cause partial or total crop failures with repercussion on
livelihoods tranquility and sedentarily settlement threatening the overall food securing situation
of whole, community or country. Generally, an agricultural system that depends entirely on
rainfall are the most hit in the event of drought. As the drought prolonged, irrigated agriculture
also run into problem as surface and underground waters dwindles down. Drought in agriculture,
cause lost of production, soil degradation and loss of its nutrients, abandonment of agricultural
lands, migration of farmers, increased rural poverty and affects the overall national Gross
Domestic Production of the county.
3.3.2 Livestock
Any drought in the Gambia can impact the Livestock sector in four areas, namely: fodder, rate of
conception and calving, water availability, milk output and live weight. Fodder is the back born
of pasture for livestock survival and development, which itself depends of rainfall in the Sahel
region including the Gambia. Therefore any substantial variation in rainfall, either in frequency
or intensity could significantly affect the availability of fodder. Hence, any fall in fodder
availability due to low rainfall is the first main effect of drought on livestock production systems,
to an extent, Low rainfall also causes a drop in the availability of drinking water, precluding the
effective grazing of certain pastures7.
Drought also impacts on animal rate of conception. For Example in a drought year, animals
suffer both a lower rate of conception, due to a tardy and incomplete return to peak bodyweight
during the rains on one hand, and higher rates of miscarriage and stillbirth in the subsequent
period of pregnancy and calving in another hand, due to the high level of stress experienced by
animals as the dry season proceeds.
Drought in one year usually lead to lower calving rates in the following year, this drop in the
number of new calves within the herd is further aggravated by high mortality rates among young
stock. Whilst, in normal years of rainfall, this trend is different usually with a highly seasonal
calving pattern leading to most conceptions taking place in the mid to late rainy season (July to
October) followed by calving in the late dry season.
Another impact of drought on livestock is milk output, which depends on fodder availability.
Milk output usually falls as female access to fodder reduced and at certain level of this
inaccessibility lactation stops completely. The fall in availability of milk does not only affects
calf's nutritional status but also the consumption and nutritional levels of the herders and their
families, who to greater extend relies on their animal milk for part of their food requirements and
income.
7http://www.fao.org/wairdocs/ILRI/x5439E/x5439e02.html
14

--- Page 26 ---
Generally, in normal rainfall years, humans could often in tight competition with calves for
available milk from female animals in the herd, whereas, a drought-induced milk shortage will
intensify this rivalry.
The other aspect of livestock that could be affected by drought is animal live-weight, which
could fall drastically as grazing becomes scarce, thus reducing the value of stock in the market as
meat animals. This loss of weight also reduces animal strength resulting to less ability and value
for transportation of goods and agricultural use, such as ploughing and drawing of water for
domestic and agricultural uses.
3.3.3 Water Resources
Drought has serious implications for the water resources sector. Both surface and underground
water and water quality are affected in any drought period, especially a prolonged drought.
Surface water bodies include rivers and lakes/ponds which are replenish annually by annual
rainfall. In the national context, most lakes or ponds vary in size and differ in water holding
capacity. Generally, they are all temporal in nature, and hardly most last for the length (8
months) of the dry season in The Gambia. The rate of replenishment of surface water bodies is
affected if there is any drop or reduction of rainfall or a year of drought.
Runoff water the vehicle of this replenishment of water bodies, depends on the annual quantity
and frequency of rainfall, thus any drought or reduced rainfall will result to reduced or total
cessation of runoff water. This will in turn led to quick drying up of lakes/ponds reduce river
flow, with the consequence of less water for tidal irrigation in the central parts of the country
and animal drinking water country wide. The reduced stream/river flow will result to rapid
upstream movement of the saline front allowing salt intrusion into the fields adjacent to the main
river and its tributaries, some of which are agricultural fields.
Likewise, underground water resources in the country are constituted of different aquifer depths,
depending on the area of the country. Generally, aquifer recharge comes from rainfall and at
times from streams and rivers. Drought or reduced rainfall reduces aquifer re-charge rate
restricting the availability of underground water resulting to gradual fall in ground water supply.
Gradual fall due from drought or continued reduction in rainfall affect both urban and rural
domestic water supply and also irrigation in gardens as all the sources of domestic water supply
in country come from underground aquifers. Prolong reduction of rainfall could result to
underground salt intrusion, particularly areas close to the ocean as aquifer re-charge falls due to
reduction in rainfall or drought.
Water quality is also affected by drought, for instance, hydrological extreme events, such as
droughts affect the runoff generation and confluence mechanism of any basin with a potential of
changing the pollutants transformation and the dilution capacity of water bodies.
15

--- Page 27 ---
During dry periods as runoff when ceased completely, domestic refuses, wastes and non-point
source contaminants alike are piled up in the earth’s surface and soil. When the rain falls again
ending the dry period, these contaminants join the receiving water body along with runoffs, thus
affecting its water quality. In another, the dry–wet alternation from drought to rainfall will
promote the decomposition of the organic matters in soil and increase the load of nutrients in
water, which lead to a rapid deterioration of surface water quality in a short time.
Dust, dry wastes and leaves emanating from dry soils and it’s the surrounding environment
carried by the wind affect the water quality of surface water bodies during droughts or dry
periods,
3.3.4 Socio-economic
The socio-economic impact of drought has a pretty large ramification on society. These impacts
ranged from food crises, malnutrition, famine, migration, poverty, depression and deaths. The
drought brings along crop failure which in turn causes food crisiswhich has number of social and
economic ramifications.
The malnutrition affects people’s health and wellbeing and safety besides inviting conflicts on
the use of water resources. The high dust molecules density in the atmosphere due to prolonged
drought or dry period may finally affect the people’s respiratory system and may create allergy.
The dried condition may give more space for forest fire, which threaten the people’s life living in
the forests and forest fringes. The anticipation and depression about the loss of economy due to
drought may further create conflicts and disturb the peace of mind (Saxon, 2017).
As food becomes scared migration of people sets in from village to towns and cities (rural –
urban migration) in search of livelihood, which further aggravate the problems of employment
and social fabric. Drought can also increase poverty particularly rural communities with death of
animals due to water and fodder scarcity.
16

--- Page 28 ---
4. DROUGHT MONITORING, FORECASTING AND IMPACT
ASSESSMENT
4.1 Drought Indices
Currently there are no pre-set drought indices in the country. Meanwhile the normality of
rainfall is used as a measure to determine looming drought or low rainfall. The normality is
divided into three: Normal rainfall, Below normal rainfall and Above normal rainfall.
For this plan the following indices will be used at Regional level:
1. At the end of August if total rainfall in each region is less than 30% of the normal for
that region, a drought situation is looming;
2. At the end of August if total rainfall in each region is between 30% and 40% of the
normal for that region, a low rainfall situation is looming;
3. At the end of August if total rainfall in each region is 50% of the normal for that
region, there will be near normal rainfall;
4. At the end of August if total rainfall in each region is 60% and above of the normal
for that region, abundant rainfall is expected;
4.2 Current Monitoring, Forecasting and data collection
Currently, the monitoring systems in the country are not centralized, meanwhile, individual
institutions and Agencies had their own monitoring system using different kind of data and
information to run the system. These institutions are: World Food Programme (WFP),
Department of Water Resources (DWR), Service Planning Unit (SPU) of Ministry of
Agriculture, National Nutrition Agency (NaNA), Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO)
and Department of Agriculture (DOA).
There isn’t a known existing centralized monitoring system specifically for drought in the
country, however, there exist a working collaboration between these institutions, whereby in
the event of a looming drought/crop failure due to erratic rains, all these institutions will be
call under the coordination of the Ministry of Agriculture to provide data and information to
monitor the looming situation and advice Government appropriately. At times, WFP and the
Ministry of Agriculture in collaboration with other relevant institutions (DWR, PSU,
National Disaster Management Agency [NDMA] FAO) will organize a joint assessment of
the progress agricultural season with the objective of advising Government on the overall
situation of the season and prevailing long term and short-term food security situation.
The Agriculture Stress Index System (ASIS) developed by Global Information and Early
Warning System (GIEWS) and Climate and Environment Division (CBC) of FAO can also
be use to monitoring of drought in the country. It can detect agricultural areas with a high
likelihood of drought and support the vegetation monitoring activities of FAO-GIEWS
17

--- Page 29 ---
The only available forecast used in the country is the Seasonal Outlook that is produced
every year in June which covers the months of July, August and September (JAS). It is
prepared by experts from the West African region. The outlook also includes in it the on-set
and cessation of the rainy season.
4.3 Drought severity in all relevant sectors
The Agriculture and Natural Resources Sectors are the relevant sectors that receive the most
severe brunt of drought of crop failure. These sectors are Agriculture, Livestock, Water
Resources, Wildlife, Forestry and Health.
The severity on some sectors is direct while it is indirect on other sector. On Agriculture,
Water Resources, Livestock and Wildlife the severity is direct as they are impacted directly
with water scarcity. About 70% of the rural population is employed in the Agriculture sector
any drought more than half of the country is affected as the overall economy performance is
affected. Health and Forestry the severity is indirect. For health is the repercussion of drought
such as malnutrition, illnesses and deaths, while for the forestry is deforestation, with failure
of crops, the forest is last resort for the rural community leading to rapid deforestation.
4.4 A Drought Impact Assessment Methodology
Several methodologies do exist for drought impact assessment, in the country the following
methodologies will be used to assess drought/low rainfall:
1. The severity of the drought at National and Regional Levels;
2. The population affected (impact across gender)
3. The sector most severely affected
4. How livelihoods are affected
5. Short-term and long-term food security situation
6. The overall economic performance (GDP situation)
Multi-sectoral Team from sectors that are severely impacted by drought plus UN Agencies
will be set. The Team will use these methodologies above to assess the impact of drought in
the country and provide a report to Government for further action.
The 6 items presented in the text above will be assessed at regular intervals to determine
aggregate impacts and also use the outputs as risk ranking analysis and classification, and
monitoring tool.
18

--- Page 30 ---
5. DROUGHT RISK AND VULNERABILITY
5.1 The drought Risk and Vulnerability Assessment and GIS
Mapping
Drought risk is a combined effect of drought hazard (likelihood) and drought consequence
(vulnerability). Drought hazard is determined by frequency, duration and severity of
droughts. Drought impact on various ecosystems and economy depends on the vulnerability
of the affected system (Global Water Partnership).
Vulnerability of any sector to drought is generally term as the degree to which that sector is
likely to experience harm due to drought stress. Example for Agriculture, when drought
occurs, vulnerability of crops depends on several parameters, the most important ones being
the ability of the certain croptypes to adapt to drought stress and the environment of its
growth (soil, climate, available soil water) (Global Water Partnership).
Considering the size of the country, the vulnerability (Table 1 below) looks at sectoral
approach and only hazards connected to rainfall are considered. However, some
administrative regions are more vulnerable than others to droughts or insufficient rains due to
ecological and socioeconomic factors as shown in the map below (Figure 4).
Table 1: Vulnerability of key sectors to drought hazards
Hazard Sector Vulnerability level Remarks
Insufficient Agriculture medium The country’s Agriculture is rainfed, hence the sector
rainfall performance and productivity is highly dependent on
Long dry spells Medium availability of rainfall making it sensitive and
Drought High vulnerable to any shortfall in rainfall
Insufficient Water Medium The country’s water resources include the river and its
rainfall Resources tributaries, swamps and groundwater.
Long dry spells Low A permanent area of the river is salt water, the distance
Drought High from the mouth vary in the season; 270 km in the dry to
50km in pick of the rainy season. Seasonal rainfall is
the regulator of this saline front movement, hence any
drought or prolonged insufficient rainfall will see the
saline front moving further upstream affecting fresh
water availability.
Insufficient Medium Apart from crop agriculture, Livestock is another sector
rainfall Livestock that is seriously affected by any shortfall in seasonal
Long dry spells Low rainfall due to its dependent on rainfed pasture. During
Drought High the 2011rainfall deficiency, not only crops were
affected some herders also lost their cattle due to
hunger and diseases.
Insufficient The Low The country’s economic performance is connected to
rainfall Econ seasonal agricultural productivity. In any season with
omy unfavourable agricultural productivity see the GDP
Long dry spells Low contracting as was the case in the 2011.
Drought High
19

--- Page 31 ---
Insufficient Wildlife medium Just like the Livestock, the survival of wildlife depend
rainfall on good fauna and flora, in the case of the Gambia
Long dry spells low apart from river ecosystem, the rest of fauna and flora
Drought High depend on rainfall for good functioning, insufficient
rainfall or drought will lead to degradation of the fauna
and flora affecting ability to sustain the wildlife
Insufficient Low Health is affected by the health repercussions of
rainfall drought such as malnutrition, famine, illnesses and
Long dry spells Health Low deaths which will put extra pressure on the national
Drought High Health services, which has limited resistance to
withstand such increased pressures.
Due to geophysical conditions, climatic extremes, and high degrees of exposure and
vulnerability, The Gambia is a highly disaster-prone country. One of the major hazards affecting
the country is Drought. According to the Detailed Post Harvest Assessment in 2011, The
Gambia was affected by drought due to late, unevenly distributed and erratic rainfall during the
rainy season, with an overall deficit of 10% below normal and 37% below 2010 levels.
Particularly affected was most of the North Bank Region (Figure 4) with average rainfall being
recorded at over 76% below normal in May-June and over 35% below normal in the period of
July to October as well as Lower River Region at 82% and 41% below normal.
Figure 4: Current and Projected Rainfall of The Gambia shows decrease especially in the North Bank
Drying of the North Drying of the North
Bank Region makes Bank Region makes
it a Drought prone it a Drought prone
region region
(a) (b)
5.2 Drought Risk Areas in Various Administrative areas
The country is very small (11,295 square kilometers) and any drought will virtually affect the
whole country. However, the northern part of the country is having a higher risk to drought due
to its annual rainfall records which are always low compared to the southern part in low rainfall
year and the fact that most of its forest is deforested and the lands degraded. The region is in two
administrative areas, the North Bank Region and part of the Central River North. Most of the
populations are farmers who depend on rainfed agriculture for food and income.
Climate change is gradually altering average temperature, sea level, and the timing and amount
of rainfall, as well as contributing to more frequent, severe and unpredictable droughts. Projected
rainfall amounts in the Gambia by 2100 will be less than 600mm country wide (Figure 5).
Climate change acts as a magnifier of existing climate-related hazards, which for The Gambia
20

--- Page 32 ---
imply severe or more unpredictable return period of drought and aridity. Droughts are rare events
but are potentially highly destructive.
Figure 5: Climate Change impacts include less that 600mm of rainfall to be received in The Gambia by 21008
The larger overall drying trend of the last 40 years has had a profound impact on water
resources: dried up springs and streams and falling water tables, contraction of seasonally-
flooded swamps and enhanced saline intrusion. The Saline Front has been observed to move far
inland, penetrating what is conventionally known as a perennially freshwater area (Figure 6).
Under climate change, the Salt Water Front is projected to move further upstream by about 37
kilometers by 2100. Since the 1960s, large areas of freshwater swamps in Western Gambia have
been replaced by saltpans or salt-water marshes as a result of reduced fresh water inflow from
8 Courtesy of Fatou Sima, Head of the Climate Division of the Department of Water Resources
21

--- Page 33 ---
storm run-off, preventing rice production in North Bank Region (NBR) and Western parts of
Central River Region (CRR). Mean sea level has increased by 0.19 cm from 1901 to 2010,
mainly due to ocean thermal expansion and glacial melting, though the effects on agriculture in
The Gambia have not been discerned. Changes in the vegetation cover are evident in the North
Bank Region and northern Central River Region (Figure 7).
Figure 6: Saline water intrusion upstream due to reduced freshwater recharge to the River and salt water flow from the Ocean
into the Estuary of the River due to rising sea level.
Drying of the North
Bank Region makes
it a Drought prone
region
Drying of the North
Bank Region makes Drying of the North
it a Drought prone Bank Region makes
region it a Drought prone
region
Figure 7: Vegetation Map of The Gambia
22

--- Page 34 ---
6. DROUGHT COMMUNICATION AND RESPONSE ACTIONS
Communication of information in general is a prerequisite for efficient and effective action,
poverty eradication and socio-economic development. For effective response to drought
incidence, the Government of The Gambia must be committed to improving the timely
availability of relevant information to the population on drought at all stages (planning,
incidence, response, monitoring).In order to mitigate the effects of drought, it is important that
the general population, especially water managers and farmers, are aware of risks that they are
exposed to. They can contribute to reduction of losses by choosing less sensitive crops in case
the drought is developing already.
The existing Communication Strategy must be improved to allow sectors to clarify their specific
and thematic messages that should be communicated to different target audiences. Sector (Water,
Agriculture, Health, etc) specific strategies and crafting, packaging and dissemination of
messages and themes (e.g., Table 2) must me clearly adopted.
6.1 Communication Goal and Objectives
The ultimate goal of the Communication Strategy is improved awareness and understanding on
the management of droughts especially on water issues and initiatives in The Gambia for
effective contribution to poverty eradication and climate change adaptation through (a) ensuring
local authorities receive prompt provincial updates on drought levels; (b) raising awareness about
the status of water supply throughout the production season; (c) increasing knowledge on the
drought level alert system and potential implications; and (d) identifying mechanisms for
effective communication regarding drought status
6.1.1 Objective 1
Maintain a level of drought awareness for water resource users within the beneficiaries by
providing technical information regarding water supply and low flow demands. This will be done
through the implementation of risk ranking analysis and classification. Educated decisions are
made as drought awareness assessments and information is provided to clients, who can then
justify modifying their standard operations and can subsequently implement restriction
recommendations. Part of the authorization process is the communication of assigned drought
indicators and levels; these will be communicated prior to issuance of authorization documents.
6.1.2 Objective 2
Provide a conduit to provide technical information for regional and national level stakeholders
regarding the water supply for local communities and facilitate the return of this information
back to governing agencies. Educated decisions are prepared and implemented, allowing
management practices to adapt when data and information is shared across ministries, agencies,
and other user groups. Encourage and enable the continued participation of Drought Response
23

--- Page 35 ---
Working Group to network and develop decision making strategies with other local users, water
interest groups and stakeholders.
6.1.3 Objective 3
Communicate water conservation requirements and the potential consequences of failing to meet
these target requirements to the public. Explain the importance of mitigating drought conditions
and how the public’s continued involvement will aid in maintaining critical ecosystem functions,
and therefore build socio-economic impacts.
6.1.4 Objective 4
Define measurable targets in response to each drought level. These targets indicate to water users
the magnitude to which their water use will be affected. In extreme situations of drought, water
use may be severely curtailed by government-issued orders. It is also important to communicate
what the public may experience if water is not conserved. In times of drought, this objective
becomes very time sensitive, especially if the drought is a prolonged one. The strategy is to
complete the discussion at the permitting and renewal stage of water authorizations for
prospective water users.
Some communication strategies have been identified for recognizing, mitigating, and
implementing drought response objectives. Among them are drought response levels, early
warning of potential for drought later in the year, information and data collection for
dissemination, and identifying communication roles for local authorities and local drought
management teams.
A good internal communications plan will involve all relevant stakeholders, facilitate effective
communications, and organize response protocols. It should also address all roles and lines of
communication and/or responsibility. Last, the plan should clearly outline how information will
flow across and through the organization and to its external stakeholders.
There should be a team of stakeholders engaged on outreach services for drought
communication. They must ensure regular status updates which may be weekly in a bid to share
results and outcomes with internal stakeholders and neighbours. There should be requests for
action clear by specifying who/what/by when. There should be regular briefing of elected
officials via individual or small group meetings.
Staff level: The team should determine talking points and core messages update utility website
and verify all links. There should clear concise communication and messaging to field staff. Use
multiple outreach methods to ensure everyone knows what stage you’re in, examples: leadership
Q&A sessions throughout the organization, electronic messaging boards, central clearinghouse
for messages, email becomes a record – way to track back, coordinate with HR to include
24

--- Page 36 ---
utility/municipal talking points in employee newsletter, and other organization-wide
announcements.
6.2 Drought levels to be included in the Communication
The Drought Levels (Table 2) are based on scientific indicators including seasonal runoff for
river basins, precipitation, and stream flow. The Drought Levels are used to streamline
communications on drought conditions and risk across the country as follows.
 Level 1: Normal (Green): Conditions are normal and there is sufficient water to support
ecosystem and socio-economic needs. Emphasis is focused on preparedness and taking
action in advance of droughts in order to increase readiness of water users and
communities when it inevitably occurs.
 Level 2: Dry (Yellow): Conditions are dry and first indications of potential water supply
shortages are recognized. Emphasis is on stewardship and voluntary conservation through
education, communication and planning.
 Level 3: Very Dry (Orange): Conditions are becoming very dry. Potentially serious
ecosystem or socio-economic impacts are possible and minor impacts may already be
occurring. Emphasis continues to be on voluntary conservation but increasing use of
watering restrictions may be imposed by water service providers.
 Level 4: Extremely Dry (Red): Conditions are extremely dry and there is insufficient
supply to meet community or ecosystem needs. Progressively more severe and
widespread socioeconomic impacts are expected. Voluntary measures and increasing use
of restrictions will continue but may be augmented by regulatory responses by the
Government including use of authorities provided under the National Water Resources
Act and other supporting legislation such the Local Government Act.
Table 2: Summary of the different levels of drought conditions
25

--- Page 37 ---
6.3 Modes of Communication
6.3.1 Peer to Peer Communication
On at least a semi-annual basis, staff should engage in networking opportunities with their peers
at interconnected utilities. At a minimum, the opportunity for extension field workers and
farmers to interact can help improve understanding and working relationships as well as help
ease potentially stressful future crisis situations over the long term.
6.3.2 Regional contact list
There should be two key contacts regionally which must be updated as needed by the list
manager. The list can be hosted on cloud storage of the Ministry of Water Resources site so it is
accessible as needed by all members. The list should be reviewed annually to ensure it stays
updated. This list should as well include network of email contacts of all members.
6.3.3 Regional conference call or face-to-face Meetings
During times of drought conditions, the assigned taskforce should meet regularly face to-face to
stay up to date on conditions and actions in the region as well as to collaborate on any regionally
appropriate responses. In addition, regional conference calls could be scheduled between face-to-
face meetings to provide an easy way to touch base with peer states.
6.4 Declaration of Drought
Drought can appear quickly or slowly, last for a season or many years, and can occur locally,
regionally, or national-wide. Furthermore, a drought does not usually have a clearly defined
beginning or end and is difficult to predict. It is important to ensure that the official drought
declaration and corresponding drought stage designation occurs in a timely manner. If a drought
is declared too late or actions are not take nearly enough to reduce water use, supplies can be
severely depleted and strict water restrictions and economic impacts may be required that could
have been avoided. Conversely, premature drought declarations can result in unnecessary
mandatory water restrictions and associated impacts, while customers can lose confidence in the
declaration. Drought declarations are further complicated by the unpredictability of drought and
storm events. Droughts may extend over multiple years which could result in response targets
greater than what are provided in Table 3. The declaration of a drought and corresponding
drought stage will be a real-time decision using the drought trigger guidelines in Table 3.
The drought stage may also be de-escalated (e.g. changed from the critical to the warning stage)
and/or the drought declaration may be terminated if storm events or other hydrologic conditions
sufficiently reduce stress on the community’s water supplies. This decision will be based on
drought monitoring data, the WSI, and the historical experience and professional judgment of the
staff managing the community’s water supplies.
26

--- Page 38 ---
The Government of the Gambia has prioritized the development of more effective disaster risk
management policies (see Section 2), which include the National Disaster Management Act and
Policy in 2008 which led to the establishment of the National Disaster Governing Council under
the Office of the Vice President and its Secretariat the National Disaster Management Agency
(NDMA) that same year. The Act emphasizes the importance of developing effective strategies
to address disaster risk management. The National Disaster Management Strategic Action Plan
further sets out the priorities for implementing the Act and the Policy.
The National Disaster Management Agency, in collaboration with other technical institutions
(Agriculture, Environment, Fisheries, Forestry, Parks and Wildlife and Water Resources),
provide relevant information for the assessment of incidence and termination of droughts. There
is no one data source or approach for this assessment. For the National Water and Electricity
Corporation and the Rural Water Supply Division of the Department of Water Resources, the
following approach can be adopted and used to assess the status of demand and supply.
A Water Supply Index (WSI), based on a community’s supply versus demand is adopted for this
drought management plan. It is a running index to define thresholds for the drought stages. The
WSI is calculated as follows:
    =       /       = (                 +                +               + Water
Transfer Schemes)/                    
Maximum daily demand is used as the demand metric because it accounts for the highest
possible water use required to meet the community’s needs on a regular basis. It is required to
use the averaged daily demand of a village, or city, administrative region and a nation for a
number of years and the projected maximum daily demand. Demand statistics provide the water
requirements of human and animal populations; sectoral activities (agriculture, energy, etc) of
the economy; etc. These data are available at national, sub-national and sectoral levels and can
always be interpolated or extrapolated. It is assumed that maximum daily demands will be met
via flexibility in day-to-day operations, though demands always vary seasonally and according to
population changes/growth. Supply data includes supplies from deep and shallow boreholes;
wells; rivers, streams, lakes and artificial reservoirs; and any water transfer schemes and
agreements entered with the country.
The community monitors the WSI in real time and uses the seven-day rolling average of the
continuously-calculated WSI as the basis for a drought declaration. The rolling average is used to
smooth the variations in the WSI calculation, so that day-to-day fluctuations in the WSI do not
unnecessarily trigger a drought declaration.
27

--- Page 39 ---
The WSI is useful for evaluating a community’s (village, district, nation) capability to meet
demands, given direct (e.g. groundwater) and indirect water resources available. Data and
information is obtainable from the National Meteorological and Hydrological Services, the
Department of Water Resources, results of studies such as the National Water Resources
Assessment and from International Data Bases (UN, World Bank, UNEP, etc. As daily supply
and demand fluctuates, the community will use both quantitative (WSI) and qualitative
(professional judgment) guideposts to determine when to trigger a drought stage. In general, as
long as the WSI is above 1.1, the community may not need to enact water savings or other such
measures. Once the WSI drops below the trigger point guidelines shown in Table 3 and
community staff observe the WSI trend to be stagnant and hence not improving (i.e. the
trajectory of the line is either flat or going down), an appropriate drought stage shall be called.
Table 3: Drought Stages, Trigger Point Guidelines and Response Targets
1 Percentage water savings is measured as the most recent month or months of total retail water sales divided by the retail water sales used inthe
original WSI calculation.
From Table 3 above:
 A WSI of 1.09 to 1.05 is the quantitative trigger to the Advisory Drought Stage.In
“Advisory”, supply still exceeds demand, and the community would begin to take
measures (outlined in Section 7) to reduce demand by 10%.
 A WSI of 1.04 to 1.00 is the quantitative trigger to the Watch Drought Stage and means
that supply is nearly equal to demand. In this stage, the Town would continue measures
started in the Advisory stage and begin additional measures with the goal of reducing
demand by 25%.
 A WSI of 0.99 to 0.95 is the quantitative trigger to the Warning Drought Stage and means
that supply is now less than demand, by 1% to 5%. In this stage, the Town would
continue measures started in the Advisory and Watch stages and begin additional
measures with the goal of reducing demand by about 40%. At the Town’s discretion,
measures to increase supply may also be considered.
 A WSI of 0.90 to 0.94 is the quantitative trigger to the Emergency Drought Stage and
means that supply is up to 10% less than demand. In this stage, the Town would continue
measures started in the Advisory, Watch, and Warning stages and begin additional
measures with the goal of reducing demand by about 50%. Measures to increase supply
will also be considered.
28

--- Page 40 ---
 A WSI of less than 0.90 triggers the Critical/Crisis Drought Stage, and means that supply
is less than 90% of demand. In this stage, the Town would take all available measures to
minimize demand while actively seeking to obtain supplemental supplies, with the goal
of bringing the WSI above 1.0. Once supply equals demand, water conservation measures
can remain in place until the WSI is back above 1.1 and the drought stage can be lifted.
The following are some approaches for communication of drought information relevant to water
according to the prevailing Drought Level. These levels are valid in West Africa, as the climate
outlook and seasonal outlook are provided in these categories.
Level 1 - Normal
 Communicate predictions from scientific models of likelihood of potential for low rain
conditions (hydrological drought)
 Issue information bulletin.
Level 2 – Dry
 Issue information bulletins to local governing agencies
 Communicate with key stakeholders in impacted local authorities and specific farmers
groups
 Where appropriate, advise agricultural producers to take early action such as filling
reservoirs and filling soil profiles with fresh water if available
 Use direct and indirect communication to request water licensees to voluntarily work
together, conserve, share water and consider in-stream needs
Level 3 – Very Dry
 Intensify communication efforts as appropriate based on current conditions
 Continue to issue local media releases and/or targeted advertising to advise of watering
restrictions, encourage conservation, provide updates on local water supply status and
forecast future conditions specific to the community
 Provide regular direct updates to local government and water suppliers
 Communicate with First Nations, industry and stewardship groups, major licensees and
other key stakeholders in impacted geographic region
 Advise high volume water licensees (or all licensees on high-risk streams) directly of
conditions and request that they implement voluntary conservation measures
Level 4 – Extremely Dry
 Increase frequency of communication from all levels of government and water suppliers
with all water users through media, advertising, internet, email updates and other
channels
 Continue to issue information bulletins to local governments, water suppliers, First
Nations, industry and stewardship groups, major licensees and other key stakeholders in
impacted geographic regions
 Water Sustainability Act orders
29

--- Page 41 ---
6.5 Communication and Coordination Guidelines
An effective disaster management Forum exists at the policy level under the Office of and
chaired by the Vice President of the Republic. There is need for supervision at different levels of
the state structure. The national supervisory body must be supplemented by home Member State
legal entities. The supervisors acknowledge and are fully aware that the responsibility of
exercising supplementary supervision will, initially, remain with the competent authorities of the
Member States in which the drought issues has received official authorization.
6.6 Drought Response Actions
6.6.1 Declaration of Drought Conditions
The National Disaster Management Agency has the authority to manage disasters and
emergencies of sub-national, national and international importance.
For disasters related to droughts the following goals are relevant:
 Define the NDMA’s actions and strategy in responding to drought related emergencies
that exceed the capacity of the decentralized structures (districts, councils, wards,
villages, etc) at the Administrative Regions and Municipalities;
 Promote NDMA’s compliance with the legal requirements and responsibilities in
responding to drought emergencies;
 Establish a coordinated response by allowing the use of resources, as well as intra and
inter-sectoral dialogue to ensure a timely, efficient and effective response;
 Adopt the Emergency Call Centre of NDMA as the operations command system and to
manage and coordinate a response;
 Identify the roles and responsibilities of the different national and sub-national
organization in terms of interaction with the media during a drought emergency;
 Establish and promote the use of common protocols and procedures for responding to
drought and related emergencies.
Table 4. Showing a drought communication plan
Time Activities Person Responsible
1. When the state anticipates  conference call or face-to-face meeting is set up to o Taskforce
change in drought discuss status and next steps
2. When the state adopts  Staff prepare a draft news release, seeking input and o Staff from ministry
change in drought feedback from taskforce members for coordinated of water resources
messaging
 Staff update their websites as needed o Regional Directors
 Regional website information and links are verified for Agriculture
 Taskforce prepares regional talking points and
frequently ask questions and documents o Taskforce
members
3. After taskforce convene to  Distribute news release to local media outlets o News media outlets
review news release, talking  Distribute news release to state & federal agencies o Local staff
points and frequently asked  Local utilities conduct outreach to water customers o Taskforce
questions
30

--- Page 42 ---
7. DROUGHT MITIGATION AND PREPAREDNESS
With increasing vulnerability to drought is remarked globally, particularly in the Sub-Saharan
Region and with concern on climate change also increasing, a greater attention has been directed
to reducing risks associated with drought occurrences through the introduction of policies and
plans to improve operational capabilities of climate and water supply/resources monitoring,
building institutional capacities and laying mitigation measures that are aimed at reducing the
impacts of drought.
In the Gambia, with the increasing rainfall variability together with other natural hazards such as
bush fires, floods and storm winds, the Government decided to set up the National Disaster
Management Agency (NDMA), with an Act and National Strategy. The Agency is responsible
for managing post disaster responses and communicating disaster related alerts. However, the
country is yet to have a national drought policy and plan.
Some of the issues on the current status of the country on drought preparedness include the
following:
 The low institution capacities and resources of the existing Government bodies (Ministry
of Agriculture and the National Disaster Management Agency) to deal with drought
issues;
 Often drought/crop failures responses are coordinated through several Agencies, both
Governmental and Non-Governmental with little central coordination;
 The inventions in terms of reliefs/aids are directed toward human relief and recovery;
 There is little or no post-drought/crop failures evaluation of responses undertaken;
 None existence a formal drought/crop failure contingency plan;
 The current early warnings can serve drought and famine but need to be instituted in a
national drought policy (which does not exist) and a drought plan;
 Climate change vulnerability and risk assessments of sectors often carried out in every
four years as part of the National Communication under the United Nation Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC);
 Drought/crop failure mitigation actions mainly focus on economic and crop
diversification and poverty reduction measures, increasingly viewed as part of the
development process with drought policy lacking.
As expected, a detailed organizational structure with institutional capacity and resources should
be in place in country to coordinate all actions of government at various levels, as well as those
of donors and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs). The following Table 5 shows key
agencies that are involved in Drought Management.
31

--- Page 43 ---
Table 5: National and sub-National Agencies and their responsibilities in Drought
Management
National and Sub-National Agencies Drought Management Responsibilities
Office of the Vice President; Ministry of  Lead development of national and sub-national legislation and policy related
Fisheries, Water Resources and National to drought management in The Gambia;
Assembly Matters; Ministry of  Oversee and coordinate the science, technical and socio-economic
Environment, Climate Change and Natural requirements for the assessment of impacts and monitoring of the water
Resources Management (MECCNAR); resources before, during, and after droughts;
and Department of Water Resources.  Administer the National Water Policy and Act, the Climate Change Policy
and Act (to be developed); National Disaster Management Policy and Act, the
National Environment Policy and Act, and the Agriculture and Natural
Resources Policy and relevant regulations.
 Responsible for the collection, interpretation and dissemination of
standardized water resource information
 The National Meteorological and Hydrological Services of the Department of
Water Resources operate hydrometric, climate and water quality networks in
partnership with other relevant agencies (NDMA, NEA, etc.).
Offices of the Regional Governors, Offices  Lead Regional Administration and Municipal Council Agency for drought
of Lord Mayors, Technical Advisory coordination and response
Group (TAG), Elected Representatives,  Administer the Local Government, Water Resources and other relevant
(National Assembly and Councilors) and Regulations and Policies at the sub-national level
Traditional/Community Leaders (Chiefs,  Operate the Hydrological, Meteorological and Disaster Management Centers
Alkalolus and Village Development to collect and interpret meteorological, hydrological and hydrological data to
Committees) provide warnings and forecasts of stream and runoff conditions at the sub-
national level
 Monitor environmental, surface and ground water quality and groundwater
levels at the sub-national level;
 Conserve, restore and protect terrestrial and aquatic biodiversity habitats and
ecosystems;
 Communicate directly with various stakeholders, especially water users, about
actions commenced under the National Drought Plan and during a drought
phenomenon;
 Consider, manage and protect water as a forest resource under the National
Forest Act, National Wildlife and Biodiversity Act and the Climate Change
Policy and the Agriculture and Natural Resources Policy
 Lead agency for managing wildfire threats, especially during drought
conditions;
 Administer the National Fisheries Act, Policy and Strategy which protects
fish and fish habitats
Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) and  Deliver the component of the National Drought Plan to eater and agriculture
Ministry of Fisheries and Water Resources and provide timely information of the impacts of climatic variability on water
and National Assembly Matters supply and agriculture
(MoFWRNAM)  Provide information on agricultural water use practices that reduce drought
vulnerability and improve management during a drought;
 Support agricultural industries and enterprises in meeting their water
requirements for the production of food and other agriculture and natural
resources products
 Communicate with the broad stakeholders in the agriculture and natural
resources sectors in relation to actions identified and being implemented in
this National Drought Plan
 Collect and disseminates information on irrigation, crops, soil, forest,
biodiversity and livestock management during times of drought;
 Regional Administration and Municipal level Livestock Officers provide
guidance to Livestock herders and water suppliers on preparedness and
response planning related to loss of water supply especially during drought
occurrences’
 Regional Administration and Municipal level Horticultural Officers provide
guidance to Gardeners and Horticulturalists on preparedness and response
planning related to loss of water supply especially during drought
occurrences.
32

--- Page 44 ---
Ministry of Local Government and Lands  Oversee local government activities under the Local Government Act
 Provide water conservation resources and advice to local government water
authorities, suppliers and end users (the communities);
 Communicate with local government authorities and grass root level
communities on the activities identified and implemented under this National
Drought Plan
Ministry of Health and Social Welfare  Provide policy support and guidance relating to the National Water Resources
(MoHSW) and Health Authorities at the Act, especially as it deals with portable water for communities.
Regional Administration and Municipal  Administer and enforce the National Water Resources Act.
levels.  Regional Administration and Municipal level Rural Water Supply Officers of
the Department of Water Resources provide guidance to water suppliers and
local governments on preparedness and response planning related to loss of
water supply especially during drought occurrences.
National Disaster Management Agency  Coordinate emergency support to local authorities as required to address
(NDMA), National Environment Agency community specific requirements under drought conditions
(NEA), National Fire Services and  Office of Commissioner of Fire Services to receive information on predicted
National Security Services. fire incidents and hotspots to enable to serve as First Responder to fire
incidents under drought occurrences.
7.1 National Water Resources Monitoring and Impact Assessment
Monitoring of the quality of drinking water is a set of actions that are systematically adopted by
public health authorities to ensure that the water consumed by the population meets the
legislative requirements regarding the portability of water and does not represent health risks to
humans.
Monitoring programs regarding the quality of water for human consumption should be developed
according to different risk scenarios for each locality; however, some actions must be guaranteed
during drought situations such as the following:
 Develop, in conjunction with those responsible for the water system, or via an alternative
collective solution to provide a water supply, an action plan containing the definition of
strategies and activities to minimize risk to health;
 Conduct sanitary inspections of the various forms of water supply, particularly of
alternative solutions used for emergency supplies, such as wells, ponds, fountains and
water trucks, and, where necessary, arrange for the temporary prohibition of such use
until improvements are in relation to sanitary conditions;
 Identify other safe water when necessary, even if they are situated in other cities;
 Conduct monitoring of the quality of water for human consumption, prioritizing the most
vulnerable locations;
 Provide sanitary barriers in conjunction with health monitoring and other partners to
carry out the inspection of vehicles responsible for water supply, such as water trucks;
 Support health education actions along with other health professionals and those
responsible for water supply using water trucks, particularly in relation to advising people
about the proper handling and storage of water, the cleaning and disinfecting of water
tanks, the treatment of water intended for human consumption in homes (filtration and
the addition of two drops of 2.5% sodium hypochlorite to each liter of water or, in case of
the unavailability of hypochlorite, filtration followed by boiling);
33

--- Page 45 ---
 Determine priority sources of water to supply water trucks, prioritizing the capture of
water in water treatment plants using conventional forms of treatment and, where not
possible, prioritize obtaining water from underground or surface water sources. Perform
minimum levels of water treatment through filtration and disinfecting before distribution
to the population;
 Participate in anti-drought committees in places where they are established;
 Request that those responsible for water systems, or alternative collective solution to
provide water supplies, systematically monitor the concentration of cyanobacteria in the
catchment points of surface water and improve the operational control of water treatment
plants, including more frequent washing of fast filters to avoid the accumulation of algae
and cyanobacteria in the filter bed, which can cause the release of cyanotoxins into the
treated water;
 Maintain links with emergency units (hospital and emergency care) to warn of the
possible increase in the number of cases of waterborne diseases, especially acute cases of
diarrhea, and a potential increase in the number of cases of psychosocial and behavioral
disorders.
Emergency situations such as droughts lead to discussions about universal access to safe water
and sanitation, the use of new technologies to minimize waste, water treatment in emergencies,
and water saving measures.
7.2 Development of New and Alternative Water Sources
The current Water Resources of country combined both surface and ground water. The Water
Sources of the country are three; surface water, Rain Water and Groundwater. The first and last
are permanent, whilst the second is seasonal and temporal in nature. The surface water is the
river and the ocean, which as the first (River) is partly fresh and partly salty. The part of the
river that connects with the Ocean about a length of 50km from the mouth is permanently salty.
However, it fluctuates with the year from 50km in the mid the rainy season to 270km up stream
in the mid of the dry season (March-May), the rest up to Senegal is fresh water.
This movement of salty and fresh water is called the saline front, greatly influenced by the
annual amount of rains, more dependently on the on-set, length and end of the rainy season.
Much of the central and eastern parts of the country rely on the river for rice cultivation,
vegetable gardening and fruit trees farming and to some extent for domestic and Livestock
water uses.
The second sources of water, which rain water is seasonal in nature (June – October) with inter-
annual variation characteristics which are becoming more unpredictable with climate change.
Meanwhile, its access and use as water source for domestic and agricultural is limited to few
months (June – October) in the year. Despite the short period, it is significant and relevance for
34

--- Page 46 ---
the sustenance of the country’s water resources as it recharges the ground water aquifers as well
as controlling the saline front.
The third source of water for the country is groundwater which is found across the country at
different layers and depth of aquifers. It is mainly the source of water for domestic use for both
urban and rural settlements and agricultural activities such as vegetable gardening and small
scale garden irrigation. Wells (some traditional, some modern concrete line wells) and
boreholes (shallow and deep) are the main means of abstracting ground water for public and
private uses.
With rainfall, the only means of recharge of surface and groundwater sources, any prolonged
drought or deficient rainfall has the potential to affect these two water sources with serious
consequences that can lead to water scarcity and the resulting hardship with probable conflicts.
Hence the need to develop new and alternative water sources is essential as a way of mitigating
drought and deficient rainfall in the country through rain water harvesting from roof tops in
residential areas; rain water harvesting from surface run-off through creation of reservoirs in
low-land areas in the country; and improvement of potable water supply infrastructures in both
urban and rural settlements
7.3 Water Conservation Practices/Public Education Awareness and
Outreach
In general, the domestic uses of water in the country at the rural and urban setting are not
regulatory through an act of parliament or bill. There is no enforcement on the daily quantity of
water uses by person or household; it is left to individual households to regulate the uses of
water. The domestic uses of water are more arbitrarily in the rural settlements than in the urban
settlements, as in the later, users are very much concern of the costs as the usage will reflect on
their water bills, hence they more rational in their daily uses. In the rural settlements, where
much of potable water supply is communal own, with cost being shared communally or by local
Governments, therefore with little rational on the uses of water or it, conservation. Meanwhile,
local authorities has established a regulatory system through Water Management Committees in
most of the rural water supply facilities to oversee the management of the facility that includes
maintenance and sharing of the costs related to maintenance and repairs.
Meanwhile, as drought affects water resources and supply of potable water to the population,
certain water conservation practices such those below could be considered:
1. To conserve and increase vegetative cover by reforestation to facilitate rain water
infiltration and reduce erosion to increase groundwater quantity; the sources much of the
domestic water supply;
2. Increasing vegetation around the natural ponds and open water sources to reduce losses
by evaporation, thus increasing water availability for human and animal uses;
35

--- Page 47 ---
3. Introducing or enforcing regulations/measures on the domestic and agricultural uses of
water to minimize arbitrary uses of water waste,
4. Conduct public sensitization on the rational uses of water, through use of television and
radio programmes, workshops and peer group discussions,
5. Introducing a National Water Policy, accompanied with an implementation strategy and
a strong regulatory framework if it does not exist or improving any existing one.
6. With the effects of climate change, the introduction of a national standardized well and
borehole depths across the country to increase water quantity and avoid drying of wells in
the dry seasons.
7.4 Legislation and Land Use Planning
7.4.1 Land Use Change
Until the middle of the 20th century, The Gambia’s landscapes (Figure 8, 1975 panel) were
extensively wooded, as part of the broad Sudanian wooded savannas that sweep across this
latitude of West Africa. Today, vegetation density and diversity increases from east to west, as
well as from the relatively drier north to the moister south. The Gambia’s land cover has changed
dramatically. The first change is the expansion of agriculture as the savannas are cleared for
farming (see Figure 9 below). The second is the rapid urban sprawl of Greater Banjul Area
(GBA, see Figure 10) and beyond9.
Among The Gambia’s semi-natural landscapes, savanna (which ranges from open shrub and tree
savanna to dense wooded savanna) is still the predominant class by area. However, the maps in
Figures 6 and 7shows that it is giving way to agriculture. In 1975, savanna occupied 51.3 percent
of the total land area, whereas in 2013 it occupied 43.4 percent. Majestic gallery forests (and
fringing riparian forests along humid bottomlands) once lined most of the streams and drainage
ways. As a result rice cultivation, these gallery forests are being seriously depleted by clearing,
or degraded by selective logging of large trees for high value wood. In 1975, 324 sq km of
gallery forest were mapped. By 2013, only 185 sq km remained, registering a loss of over 42
percent. In contrast, The Gambia’s mangrove forests have been fairly stable, with a
slight increase in area from 602 sq km in 1975 to 654 sq km in 2013.
With the French introduction of groundnuts as a cash crop in Senegal in the 1800s, the
production of groundnuts gradually spread across the border into western The Gambia. By the
1930s, the northern half of The Gambia had become the nation’s main agricultural region. By
2013, The Gambia’s western portion, north of the river, had become almost continuously
cultivated, and the traditional system of bush fallow largely abandoned. At the national level,
agriculture in 1975 was found on 21 percent of The Gambia’s land area. The area increased to
23.9 percent in 2000 (Figure 8, 2000 Panel, and 28.1 percent in 2013 (Figure 8, 2013 Panel.
9https://eros.usgs.gov/westafrica/land-cover/land-use-land-cover-and-trends-gambia.html
36

--- Page 48 ---
Figure 8: TTTeeemmmpppooorrraaalll CCChhhaaannngggeeesss iiinnn LLLaaannnddd UUUssseee aaannnddd LLLaaannnddd CCCooovvveeerrr ooofff TTThhheee GGGaaammmbbbiiiaaa fffrrrooommm 111999777555 777000mmm 222000111333
37

--- Page 49 ---
Figure 9: National Land Cover Baseline Map, January 2014
Figure 10: Panchromatic images taken from Earth Observation Satellites
7.4.2 Land Use Policy and Planning
The ensuing discussions in the previous paragraphs and maps (Figures 6 and 7) suggest rapid
land use change in the country. Government is concerned by these challenges in land use change
and wants to ensure sustainable planning and design by (a) working closely with the
governments, local authorities, private sectors of urban and rural areas to design and implement a
sustainable development framework and programmes; (b) building spatial and planning
partnerships to integrate, harmonize and coordinate investments and social infrastructure(roads,
electricity, schools, health care delivery); (c) revising the intergovernmental planning and
development framework to provide for more specific and forward-looking planning innovations;
and (d) encouraging land reform and private sector participation in Vision 2020.
38

--- Page 50 ---
The Government has recognized the alarming rate of degradation of forest resources, and has
commissioned an institutional review, and an update of the Forest Policy discussed under Section
2 of this plan. The review reflected the poor implementation of the policy provisions resulting to
under-achievement of the envisaged targets. The review showed that climate change impacts and
response measures and traditional domestic energy have not been adequately addressed as key
policy objectives.
The policy recognizes government’s strategic shift towards poverty reduction and economic
growth, which underpins vision 2020, the Gambia Environment Action Plan, Local Government
Reforms and Decentralization, the National Development Plan, National Action on
Desertification, etc. The provisions will accommodate government’s decentralization process;
and demand driven “bottom-up approach” strategy of the Local Government Act, 2002. This Act
places management responsibilities on the Local Government Area Councils for a range of
natural resources under their jurisdiction.
7.4.3 Legislature supporting Land Use Planning
While the 2002 Local Government Act provides a relatively comprehensive legislative
environment, there is a need for review to mainstream climate change within the context of
sustainable development; and to ensure that provisions and enforcement are in place to control
the widespread problems of settlement that encourages the removal of vegetation cover and the
top soil, thus exacerbating reduction in rainfall, dryness and drought conditions, especially the
northern part of the country.
The most recent overview of the Banjul Urban Profile is found in the UN-Habitat study of 2012
(GOTG/UNHABITAT, 2012). This report underlines the importance of the three planning areas:
Banjul itself, the Kanifing Municipal Council and Brikama Town in the West Coast Region. This
demarcation of the Greater Banjul Area (GBA) underlines both the facts that Physical Planning
(as defined by the Act) and Local Government (as defined by the Act) are the determining
foundations on which to build a land use plan for the GBA. As regards GBA, physical planning
is hampered by a number of key factors. Master Plans are outdated, problems exist with regard to
land registration and acquisition, and land encroachment has become uncontrollable, despite the
existence of the State Lands Act of 1990 – equally outdated, with no mention of climate change.
For example, while the State Lands Act provides for 99-year leases, the Act makes no mention of
what potential effects sea-level rise could have on the land-areas being leased. Furthermore,
while the State Lands Act does reserve to the State the right to enter land for certain purposes,
such as “removing stone, soil or other substances for construction or repair” no requirement is
put on the State to take into consideration the potential environmental impacts of such or, at
least, not under the auspices of the State Lands Act.
39

--- Page 51 ---
7.4.4 Land Resource Tenure and Legislation in The Gambia
Tenure is simply the term for the rights that individuals and communities have in land and other
natural resources. The nature of these rights and the extent to which people have confidence that
they will be honoured (“security of tenure”) play a critical role in determining how resources are
used. When these rights are framed effectively so that they provide secure expectations of
continued access to resources, their users are more likely to take the long view, conserving and
regenerating, rather than exhausting, the resource base. Alternatively, dysfunctional tenure rules
can lead to resource degradation. For analytical purposes, it is often helpful to consider tenure
arrangements in light of property-rights categories as in Table 6 below.
Table 6: Main tenure types in the Gambia (Amie Bensuda & Co. 2013)
Conflicts around natural resources in rural Gambia are a constant characteristic of rural life. It is
often assumed that conflicts are the consequence of dysfunctional customary tenure systems.
Leasehold or freehold tenure systems are assumed to generate fewer conflicts than customary
tenure systems. Another way to view conflicts and conflict-mediation processes is to consider
how dispute resolution leads to change within the tenure system. Through the mediation process,
old rules governing resource use maybe abandoned and new ones instituted. The resulting
restructuring of tenure regimes may result in changes of the social status of the contending
members, something that may or may not be judged equitable and fair. The outcome of the
dispute-resolution process must be judged on a case-by-case basis. For some policymakers the
existence of numerous rural conflicts, sometimes very violent in nature, justifies the need for
major land reforms.
40

--- Page 52 ---
8. THE NATIONAL DROUGHT ACTION PLAN
8.1 Priority Implementation Actions
A variety of strategies and actions must be pursued to improve the resilience of the country’s
economy especially the sectors (agriculture, water resources, fisheries, forestry, parks and
wildlife, etc) that are climate and rainfall dependent. These investments must be made as part of
a comprehensive plan that includes, for the water resources sector, expanded water conservation,
water recycling, storm water capture and reuse, local and regional water storage, groundwater
management and other strategies to ensure water supply reliability and ecosystem health in The
Gambia. For the forestry and parks systems, tree growing using indigenous trees which are
climate and climate change resilient would work under harsh conditions including droughts.
Based on stakeholder consultations and literature review, the following key actions are relevant
to the development and implementation of the Gambia National Drought Plan as indicated in
Table 5 below.
1. Establish a Technical Drought Action Group to share information and develop
recommendations to address the current and prepare for future drought conditions under
projected climate change;
2. Compile and publish historical and current statistical information on drought impacts
around the country as a snapshot in time;
3. Under scenarios of continuing and future (e.g. 10, 15 or 20 years) drought conditions,
identify future vulnerabilities and impacts across sub-national and national jurisdiction
and also across relevant sectors of the economy (water, agriculture, forests, wildlife
protection, ecosystems, commercial industries, trade, etc.)
4. Design and operationalize an Environment and Climate Change Data Base at the National
Meteorological Agency of The Gambia with Nodes at relevant departments that include
National Environment Agency, National Disaster Management Agency, Department of
Agriculture, Department of Forestry, Department of Parks and Wildlife Management,
Department of Water Resources, Department of Livestock Services, Department of
Fisheries and Department of Health Services.
5. Design and implement a Comprehensive Water Resources Management Programme for
The Gambia that will respond to current climate and climate change related drought
conditions at the sectoral, sub-national and national levels.
5.1. Conduct a comprehensive study with results to inform the process of updating all
natural resources and other relevant policies and regulations and facilitate long-
term solutions for sustainability in the applicable natural resources, particularly,
water management plans;
5.2. Update the National Water Resources Master Plan including the design,
promotion, facilitation and encouragement of innovative water supply
41

--- Page 53 ---
technologies such as irrigation that may be needed under a water-stressed
economy due to projected climate change.
5.3. Policy and institutional reforms in the water resources sector (e.g., relocation of
abstraction points, changes in pumping policies of deep wells and boreholes, flow
regulation, licensing and permits for withdrawal of river water for irrigation and
increase water column in wells);
5.4. Creation of new surface and groundwater storage and improved distribution
systems at the Municipal and Regional Administrative levels to help address the
nation’s projected stresses in the surface and groundwater resources under
changing climate related drought conditions; and
5.5. Development and implementation of medium and long-term water infrastructure
and technology plans and strategies to ensure reliable and sustainable water
supplies for both the economy and the environment; and improvement of
distribution at the Municipal and Regional Administrative levels.
42

--- Page 54 ---
Table 7: NATIONAL DROUGHT PLAN – THE GAMBIA
Priority Administrative and Cross-cutting projects and actions to support Drought Management and Resilience under Changing
Climate in The Gambia at estimated cost of US$44,670,000
Project/Programme Title Goal and Objectives Input and Activities Outputs Beneficiaries Time Frame Total Cost
1. Establish a Technical  Development of an  Design and implement Established Technical MECCNAR, 2019 - 2020 600,000
Drought Action Group interactive and an interactive, Drought Action Group to MoFWRNAM,
to share information and collaborative process collaborative process provide policy relevant MoHSW,
develop of drought involving key advise to the Disaster MoLG&L;
recommendations to management; stakeholders in the Management Forum MoA; Offices
address the current and  Provision of valuable country; under the Office of the of Regional
prepare for future insight and  Provide valuable Vice President and the Governors and
drought conditions perspectives insight and Agriculture and Natural Mayors;
under projected climate necessary for a more perspectives necessary Resources Working NAWEC, DWR
change; robust and for a more robust and Group
comprehensive comprehensive
drought management drought management
plan. plan;
 Participate in the
development and
review of the draft
Drought Management
Plan and provide
feedback;
 Guide and facilitate the
means to collect and
review data and
receive feedback on
specific aspects of the
Plan;
 Develop a
representative and
applicable drought
definition, water use
priorities, plan
objectives, and
operating principles;
43

--- Page 55 ---
Project/Programme Title Goal and Objectives Input and Activities Outputs Beneficiaries Time Frame Total Cost
2. Compile and publish  Desk research on  Conduct desk research  Research report on MECCNAR, 2019 - 2020 550,000
historical and current previous droughts in on past droughts in past droughts in The MoFWRNAM,
statistical information The Gambia; The Gambia; Gambia; MoHSW,
on drought impacts  Gaps in means of  Develop historical  Compiled gaps, MoLG&L;
around the country as a management of drought profile and challenges, lessons MoA; Offices
snapshot in time; droughts; information of The learned and of Regional
 Lessons learned in Gambia; recommendations on Governors and
drought and general  Identify any gaps and improving future Mayors;
disaster management; challenges related to drought management NAWEC, DWR
 Recommendations on means of planning and
improvement in implementation implementation;
Drought and Disaster (capacity, finance, Historical drought
Management technology, etc) of profile of The Gambia
previous drought
events and
management plans;
 Compile lessons
learned from
management of past
droughts;
 Provide
recommendations to
improve the gaps, lift
the challenges and
address negative
lessons and take
advantage of positive
lessons learned.
Project/Programme Title Goal and Objectives Input and Activities Outputs Beneficiaries Time Frame Total Cost
3. Under scenarios of  Development or  Adopt existing or  Climate and climate MECCNAR, 2019 - 2020 1,200,000
continuing and future adoption of existing design climate and change scenarios at the MoFWRNAM,
(e.g. 10, 15 or 20 years) climate and climate climate change and sectoral sub-national MoHSW,
drought conditions, change scenarios at drought scenarios at and national levels; MoLG&L;
identify future national and sub- the sub-national and  Climate change and MoA; Offices
vulnerabilities and national levels national levels; drought related of Regional
impacts across sub-  Assessment of  Assess and identify impacts on sectoral, Governors and
national and national climate, climate historical and potential sub-national and Mayors;
jurisdiction and also NAWEC, DWR
44

--- Page 56 ---
across relevant sectors change and drought future drought impacts national economy.
of the economy (water, related vulnerabilities at the sub-national and  Potential actions to
agriculture, forests, and impacts; national levels; address the identified
wildlife protection,  Identification of  Determine the climate change and
ecosystems, commercial relevant actions to potential drought drought related
industries, trade, etc.) address drought mitigation measures impacts
related impacts under that address the
future climate change potential future
and droughts; drought impacts;
 Development of  Based on the identified
medium and longer scenarios, and where
term drought necessary, coin and
mitigation and expand the definition
response strategies of drought beyond the
traditional
hydrological
definition;
 Develop drought
stages, trigger points,
and response targets
that are based on the
identified climate
change related drought
scenarios;
 Develop national and
sub-national Drought
Management Plan
based on the scenarios,
impacts, and response
measures and
strategies;
 Develop and
implement medium
and longer term
drought mitigation and
response strategies at
the sub-national and
national levels.
45

--- Page 57 ---
Project/Programme Title Goal and Objectives Input and Activities Outputs Beneficiaries Time Frame Total Cost
(US Dollars)
4. Design and  Automation of all  Asses and determine the  New and upgraded  NMA,DWR, 2019 – 2021 750,000
operationalize an climatic and sectoral outstanding observations observation platforms NEA;
Environment and observations and platforms needed to and facilities for NDMA;
Climate Change Data communication satisfy effective instrument and DOA, DoF,
Base at the National system:; monitoring of climate, equipment storage, all Natural
Meteorological Agency  Provision of real time climate change and calibration and repair; Resources
of The Gambia with information environment  Operational and real- Management
Nodes at relevant dissemination to observations, time observations Agencies,
departments that include central and sectoral particularly drought and delivery systems National
National Environment databases for the related impacts for  Resilient database Associations
Agency, National climate and other climate resilience equipment for all and Forums
Disaster Management environment  Install comprehensive observations sets, dealing with
Agency, Department of observations; and automatic rainfall- climate and sectoral, Agriculture,
Agriculture, Department  Adequately equipped measuring equipment, including quality Forestry,
of Forestry, Department (computers and together with all control, input and Water
of Parks and Wildlife software) climate and essential support output facilities, and Resources,
Management, sectoral databases facilities, for real time visualization software; Livestock and
Department of Water facilities required to monitoring and reporting  Long-term on-line others
Resources, Department manage data receipt, on drought incidence, digitized records of engaged in
of Livestock Services, storage, access, prevalence, impacts and climate, climate change Agriculture
Department of Fisheries visualization, climate cessation; and the environmental and Natural
and Department of service creation and  Undertake a gap analysis elements available and Resources
Health Services. dissemination; of sectoral observations accessible to Management.
 Provision of reliable required for monitoring researchers and the
and stable internet and research on drought general public;
services to all the in particular, and climate  Working and stable
operators of climate resilience in general; internet facilities
and environmental  Support completion of available for the
data bases; the data rescue activities operations of the central
in DWR and provide and sectoral data bases.
support for sectoral data
rescue in all cases
producing digitized
records in the databases
 Install, equip and
sustainably maintain full
operational internet
46

--- Page 58 ---
services at DWR and at
other government
institutions and research
facilities involved with
climate monitoring and
resilience.
5. Design and implement a Comprehensive Water Resources Management Programme for The Gambia that will respond to 36,170,000
current climate and climate change related drought conditions at the sectoral, sub-national and national levels.
Project/Programme Title Goal and Objectives Input and Activities Outputs Beneficiaries Time Frame Total Cost
(in US Dollars)
5.1. Conduct a 1. Put in place an  Develop a Climate  Better understanding  Sectoral 2019 - 2021 920,000
comprehensive study enhanced enabling Change Act; and knowledge of the Technical
with results to inform environment for  Comprehensively state of climate Teams and
the process of achieving Drought integrate climate change resilience governance Sector
updating all natural Management and and drought and management Ministries and
resources and other climate resilience in management into systems, current gaps Climate
relevant policies and The Gambia; National and Sectoral and developments Resilience
regulations and 2. Development, Revision Development Plans  Climate Change Act governance
facilitate long-term and integration of  Revise key (Water prepared and
solutions for climate change and Resources, Agriculture,  National Development population;
sustainability in the disaster management, Forestry, Parks and Plans prepared  Regional
applicable natural particularly Droughts Wildlife, Environment,  Revised legislations, governments,
resources, into key water and Disaster Management) regulations and Sector
particularly, water natural resources legislation and their strategies Agencies,
management plans; policies, legislation, and related regulations and  Developed framework  Policy and
institutions; strategies to mainstream for integrating climate Decision-
3. Initiation and/or climate change and risks and resilience makers, and
development of drought management sectoral policies and local
coherent systems and regulatory standards communities
strategies for capacity
development on drought
planning and
management;
5.2. Update the National  Reduction in rural  Promote and facilitate  An inclusive and well NMA, DWR, 2019 - 2020 750,000
Water Resources poverty of women and watershed development; managed River NEA; NDMA;
Master Plan including young people;  Build the technical and Gambia watershed; DOA, DoF, all
the design,  Enhancement of rural managerial capacity of  Efficient, effective and Natural
promotion, incomes based on the primary producers; operational Resources
47

--- Page 59 ---
facilitation and sustainable land and enterprises; and public institutional Management
encouragement of water management and private sector framework at sectoral, Agencies,
innovative water practices; agencies providing sub-national and National
supply technologies  Expansion of the rural development support national levels; Associations
such as irrigation that economy for services.  Confident and Forums
may be needed under employment  Establish a strong communities in terms dealing with
a water-stressed generation; institutional framework of ownership and Agriculture,
economy due to  Investments in water by engaging existing management of water Forestry, Water
projected climate shed management and Government institutions, supply facilities; Resources,
change. public, private and farmers” organizations, Livestock and
communal economic and credible service others engaged
assets; providers in the in Agriculture
implementation process; and Natural
 Develop the competence Resources
and confidence of Management.
communities to take on
management
responsibility for their
local natural resource
assets;
5.3. Policy and  Relocation of new  Revise the existing  Revised Water Act and NMA, DWR, 2019 - 2021 1,500,000
institutional reforms boreholes away from Water Act and Policy to Policy; NEA; NDMA;
in the water resources heavily built up areas provide legislation that  Integrated Water DOA, DoF, all
sector (e.g., to minimize runoff fully incorporates the Resources Natural
relocation of and facilitate recharge provisions and principles Management Resources
abstraction points, of aquifers; for the establishment and approach is operated; Management
changes in pumping  Revision of water implementation of  Monitored surface Agencies,
policies of deep wells pumping and Integrated Water and groundwater National
and boreholes, flow abstraction policies Resources Management resources; Associations
regulation, licensing from surface water (IWRM) approach in The  Rehabilitated and and Forums
and permits for sources, especially Gambia; operational dealing with
withdrawal of river the River Gambia and  Develop an institutional meteorological, Agriculture,
water for irrigation its tributaries; framework, plan and hydrological and Forestry, Water
and increase water  Revision of management strategy for Hydrogeological Resources,
column in wells) regulations related to water resources monitoring networks; Livestock and
licensing and permits management in The  Developed and others engaged
for establishment of Gambia; operational water in Agriculture
water points  Acquire and operate resources knowledge and Natural
anywhere in The software and Resources
48

--- Page 60 ---
Gambia; technologies to monitor management and Management.
status of surface and communication
groundwater resources strategy
on a continuous and
sustainable;
 Rehabilitate and improve
the hydrological, hydro-
geological,
meteorological and water
quality monitoring
networks in The Gambia;
 Develop and implement
a water resources
knowledge management
information system;
 Develop and implement
a water sector related
communications
strategy.
5.4. Creation of new  Collection of rainwater  Procure, install and  Functional Roof-Top NMA, DWR, 2019 - 2021 13,000,000
surface and using roof-top and operate rooftop (gutters, Rainwater Harvesting NEA; NDMA;
groundwater storage surface-runnoff collection vessel, down- systems; DOA, DoF, all
and improved technologies and pipes, containers for  Functional Surface Natural
distribution systems infrastructure; settling particulates, Runoff-water Resources
at the Municipal and  Enhancement of storage container); harvesting systems; Management
Regional available volume of  Use roof-top harvested  Groundwater recharge Agencies,
Administrative levels freshwater for human water for non-drinking facilities; National
to help address the consumption, animal activities (horticulture,  Community Associations
nation’s projected watering and other sanitation, animal established, owned and and Forums
stresses in the surface livelihood uses (crop watering, etc); sustainably managed dealing with
and groundwater irrigation, fish farming,  Procure, install and water storage and Agriculture,
resources under etc); operate surface runoff conservation Forestry, Water
changing climate  Reduction in polluted water collection technologies and Resources,
related drought water sources due to technologies facilities; Livestock and
conditions. increased storage (constructed reservoir  Reduced poverty and others engaged
before drought and canals) for water augmented community in Agriculture
occurrence; harvesting; income and savings; and Natural
 Improvement in  Use runoff harvested Resources
Management.
49

--- Page 61 ---
employment status of water for non-drinking
the population; activities (horticulture,
 Reduction in public sanitation, animal
and private watering, etc);
expenditures  Construct and operate
associated with water facilities for income
infrastructure; generating activities
 Reduction in (aquaculture and fish
exploitation and farming, vegetable and
contribution to the small scale crop
stabilization of production, rearing of
declining groundwater livestock especially
resources; small ruminants, etc) in
 Utilization of the periphery of the
appropriate water water reservoirs;
control, retention and  Encourage and facilitate
supply technologies; full ownership and
 Promotion of managemnt of the
commercialization, installed technologies
broadening and and facilities; Establish
deepening local and and build the capacity
national markets in of a Management
terms of volume, Committee with
quality and value membership from the
addition. communities sharining
the established water
resources technologies
and facilities;
 Identify and build the
capacities of individuals
and Associations in
establishment and
operations of business
enterprises;
 Encourage producers
and value-adders to
enter into productive
dialogue with
Government and other
50

--- Page 62 ---
private sector operators
interedted and/or
engaged in water
resources management;
 Procure, install and
operate artificial
groundwater recharge
facilities
5.5. Development and  Implementation of  Design and implement Urban areas of the Greater NMA, DWR, 2019 - 2024 20,000,000
implementation of Integrated Water the Integrated Water Banjul area and towns in NEA; NDMA;
medium and long- Resources Resources Management Regional Provinces DOA, DoF, all
term water Management (IWRM) approach; Urban areas of the Greater Natural
infrastructure and approach nation-  Develop and implement Banjul area and towns in Resources
technology plans and wide; a Rural Water Supply Regional Provinces and Management
strategies to ensure  Development of a Programme to attain local communities Agencies,
reliable and Rural Water Supply 100% coverage in the Rural areas of The National
sustainable water Programme to attain Gambia; Gambia and towns in Associations
supplies for both the 100% coverage in the  Put in place a robust Regional administrative and Forums
economy and the Gambia; village water supply level and local dealing with
environment; and  Institutionalization of maintenance mechanism communities Agriculture,
improvement of a robust village water to maintain the systems Urban areas of the Greater Forestry, Water
distribution at the supply maintenance to a satisfactory and Banjul area and towns in Resources,
Municipal and mechanism; sustainable level; Regional Provinces and Livestock and
Regional  Expansion of the  Increase the density of local communities others engaged
Administrative levels. density of observation observation boreholes for in Agriculture
boreholes to monitor effective groundwater and Natural
the groundwater monitoring; Resources
extraction rates and  Increase access to safe Management.
possible relocation of drinking water and
boreholes due to salt improved sanitation in
water intrusion; the rural areas of The
 Facilitation of water Gambia from the current
uses efficiency level of about 70% to
activities in 72% for water supply
disadvantaged and from 40% to44% for
communities and sanitation;
support programs that  Provide 18 new
are locally cost boreholes to supply
effective and
51

--- Page 63 ---
contribute broad piped water to medium
benefits to The and large size rural
Gambia. communities (with
greater than 1000 people)
and installation of stand-
alone solar powered
pumping units, elevated
water tanks, distribution
network and public
stand-taps;
 Rehabilitate and upgrade
4 existing water supply
facilities to solar
powered pumping units,
elevated water tanks, a
distribution network and
public stand-taps;
 Climate proof the Urban
and peri-urban water and
sanitation infrastructure
52

--- Page 64 ---
8.2 Future Updates and Revisions
Generally drought is a consequence of inadequate availability of water. It is a weather
phenomenon which is caused by insufficient rainfall; it is characterized by causing a sustained
reduction of existing water resources in a given region, for a prolonged period of time; it is a
period of low rainfall, or the lack of rain, in which soil moisture loss is greater than gain.
Drought is considered to be one of the major natural disasters and its impacts are aggravated
when it is associated with precarious livelihoods and the socio-economic vulnerability of a
specific population. Disasters caused by prolonged drought affect millions of people,
contributing to hunger, poverty and malnutrition, outbreaks of infectious and respiratory
diseases, as well as influencing the human migration process. Drought can change the profile of
morbidity and mortality of diseases, as well as having an impact on the supply of services that
are essential to the quality of life of the public. This type of scenario can place immense stress on
the normal routine of health services and infrastructures, particularly at times when they are most
needed.
All the conditions described above are expected to increase and become more severe under
projected climate change. Hence, it is critically essential that national and sub-national systems
and institutions relevant for future drought management should be revised and updated to
become more resilient and to promote resilient economies. The following will be relevant for the
revision and updating of the national and sub-national systems.
1. National and sub-nation institutions and organization should have action plans in place,
including scenarios based on the historic occurrences of droughts, an inventory of
existing resources, and they should be able to identify what resources are required for a
timely response to droughts under future climate and climate change scenarios..
2. It is necessary to strengthen the performance capacity of the structures under the natural
resources and social sectors (e.g., Health) in order to develop timely responses to reduce
the risk of drought across national and sub-national systems.
3. To reduce the impacts of droughts on the national economy, it is essential to develop
actions to strengthen the ability of emergency services to deal with emergencies
associated with drought in order to ensure the provision of services and the reduction of
ensuing risks.
4. Studies and research must be conducted to produce guidance documents to support the
participation of drought prone sectors and communities in emergencies for the
management of information, for the evaluation of lessons that are learned, and to improve
the work process both continuously and permanently.
5. Develop and strengthen the understanding of the behavior of droughts and associated
disasters and to have prior knowledge of their geophysical, environmental, social,
economic and political characteristics, as well as the health profile of the population in
the affected areas.
53

--- Page 65 ---
9. IMPLEMENTATION OF THE NATIONAL DROUGHT
ACTION PLAN
Implementation of the Nationa Drought Action Planof The Gambia (Section 8) is contingent on
the availability and implementation of a Drought Policy and the National Climate Change Policy
(NCCP), development and enactment of a climate change legal framework and a well-
established institutional structure with well-defined roles and responsibilities of institutions and
individuals. In The Gambia both the climate change policy and the institutional structure are in
their infancy stages. There is no climate change law.
9.1. Drought Implementation Framework and Future Revision of the
Plan
Given the cross-cutting and overarching role that policy, legislative and institutional reform
plays in enabling The Gambia’s climate change response, the following priority actions are
envisaged for the implementation of the Gambia National Drought Plan.Many of the mitigation
measures are geared towards the improvement of sustainable availability of water supplies under
climate and climate change drought management systems and framework. The timelines
indicated in the Plan and aligned to the National Development Plan (2018 – 2021) of The
Gambia
The Drought Technical Working Group is responsible for monitoring and providing final
recommendations on the timing of drought incidence. This Technical Working Group
communicates relevant information to the Disaster Management Forum under the Office of the
Vice President at State House. The Forum is responsible for the provision of advice and the Vice
President, as Chair of the Forum, is ultimately responsible for the official declaration of drought
and subsequent stages of a drought to the decision-makers and the general public. The protocol
designed and operated at the sub-national and national levels is strictly followed during the
implementation of the drought response plan.
9.2 Partnerships and an Integrated Approach
Collaboration with organizations, communities, and other partners is one of the most important
and sustainable means to implement the Drought Plan in particular and generraly face the
challenges of global climate change, accompanying hazards such as droughts and adapt to its
impacts. The scale of climate change related droughts impacts far exceeds the ability of any one
country, agency, or organization to effectively respond as a single entity. It is necessary to foster
partnerships among national and sub-nation governments, organizations, private, academic, and
non-governmental entities at local, regional, national, and international levels. Existing
sustainable partnerships, which have evolved over time, are an ideal platform to support
combined efforts towards mutual goals for drought response. Additionally, new partnerships
specific to climate change related droughts should be forged to provide the enabling
54

--- Page 66 ---
environments for closer working relations on a range of science and drought response and
mitigation tools for decision making.
Mechanisms will be established and made functional to engage and partner with key
stakeholders in order to maximise effective climate change related drought mitigation and
response programmes. These partnerships will be developed in such a way that government plays
a supporting role to some of the proposed programmes and projects and a leading and oversight
role in others in the Drought Plan. The integrated approach to addressing climate change needs to
be highlighted throughout these partnerships and it is important that the proposed activities as
part of the National Drought Plan are not limited to those actions that are managed by the public
sector.
9.3 Financing and resourcing the Natioal Drought Plan
Finance for climate and disaster management refers to local, national or transnational financing,
which may be drawn from public, private and alternative sources of financing. Finance is critical
to addressing hazards, including droughts, because large-scale investments are required to
significantly reduce impacts, notably in key sectors such as water resources, agriculture,
fisheries, forestry and parks and wildlife. In accordance with the principles of Multilateral
Environment Agreements(CBD, CCD and UNFCCC), developed countries are to provide
financial resources to assist developing countries in implementing the objectives of the
Agreements. It is important for all governments and stakeholders to understand and assess the
financial needs developing countries have so that such countries can undertake activities to
address climate change hazards including droughts. Governments and all other stakeholders also
need to understand the sources of this financing, in other words, how these financial resources
will be mobilized.
Equally significant is the way in which these resources are transferred to and accessed by
developing countries. Developing countries need to know that financial resources are
predictable, sustainable, and that the channels used allow them to utilize the resources directly
without difficulty. For developed countries, it is important that developing countries are able to
demonstrate their ability to effectively receive and utilize the resources. In addition, there needs
to be full transparency in the way the resources are used in mitigating hazards and responding to
to the impacts. Access to multilateral finances are getting difficult and limited.
The National Climate Change Action Plan (NCCAP) identifies the key priorities for The Gambia
to successfully transition to a low-carbon, climate-resilient growth path whilst realising the
ambitions of Vision 2030 of becoming a middle-income country. The realisation of these bold
ambitions identified in the most of strategies recently developed by The Gambia will require
substantial financial resources. To be successful, The Gambia will need to access resources from
both public and private sources and from both within The Gambia and overseas. Raising the
necessary capital is currently impeded by a number of barriers some of which include policy and
55

--- Page 67 ---
regulatory weaknesses, difficulties in accessing private finance and technical capacity
shortcomings. However, the judicious use of public resources can play a key role in overcoming
these barriers through improving access to finance or ameliorating some of the negative social
and redistributive impacts that might otherwise be experienced from, for instance, higher
electricity prices..
According to the National Climate Change Policy and for sustainability, Gambia is creating
create a stand-alone dedicated National Climate Fund that is expected to have more clarity of
purpose relative to greater budgetary support and would offer greater opportunities for alignment
with national priorities (the ‘ownership’ principle). A National Forest Fund (NFF) also exists and
funds activities related to implementation of the Forest Policy.The ability of the Government of
The Gambia to absorb international public climate finance, as well as to use its own public
resources expeditiously towards sustainable environment management could be improved.
At the international level, it is proposed that one avenue to funding the Gambia National Drought
Plan is the Global Mechanism under the UNCCD, the multilateral funds under the UNFCCC
(e.g., GCF, LDCF, SCF) and Bilateral cooperation funds (e.g., AFD French Development
Agency, DANIDA, DFID, German International Climate Initiative, Global Facility for Disaster
Reduction and Recovery, Nordic Climate Facility, World Bank Climate Investment Funds and
World Bank Pilot Program for Climate Resilience).The Global Mechanism under the UNCCD
supports Parties in translating the Convention into action and achieving Land Degradation
Neutrality at the national level. The GM provides advisory services, promotes partnerships,
demonstrates innovations, increases the effectiveness and efficiency of existing financial
mechanisms, seeks to attract and channel investments from innovative financial sources such as
climate change funds, private sector operations and micro-finance and translates cutting-edge
knowledge into tailored, country-level action. The GM works with country Parties to the
UNCCD and a broad variety of international and regional partner institutions to enhance their
understanding of new financing modalities, and make sustainable land management (SLM) a
priority in the country’s domestic budget allocations.The Gambia will need to establish a
coordinated strategy and operational capacity for accessing these Funds. It is also important to
define institutional competence in measurable terms such as organisational mandate, staffing,
resource budgets, information systems, pilot actions, even sectoral leadership and local
champions.
56

--- Page 68 ---
10. MONITORING, REPORTING AND VERIFICATION OF THE
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE NATIONAL DROUGHT PLAN
Monitoring, evaluation, reporting and verification will be critical activities of the implementation
of this The GambiaNational Drought Plan. These activities are expected to ensure that
implementation actions of the Plan are effective and put more emphasis on integration of climate
change risks and responses into development frameworks and so go beyond the implementation
of the project activities. These activities should be able to influence and effectively contribute to
the achievement of sectoral, national and regional development objectives and goals and also
complement national efforts and on-going and planned initiatives by other bi-lateral and
multilateral development partners.
The overarching objectives of the Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) System will be to track the
transition of The Gambia to a low carbon and climate resilient economy. This will include:
1. Provision of a clear picture of the various drought mitgation and response measures;
2. Provision of an assessment of the effectiveness of these mitigation and response
measures;
3. Applying a consistent approach to these assessments to allow for greater comparability;
4. Increasing co-ordination of climate change response measures;
5. Demonstrating impact of response measures to Government and development partners;
6. Increasing transparency on financial flows relating to climate and climate change related
drought responses; and
7. Increasing awareness of historical, observed and projected droughts and their impacts.
It will be necessary to develop and apply an integrated framework for measuring, monitoring,
evaluating, verifying and reporting results of response actions and the synergies between them.
Effective implementation of the National Drought Plan is highly dependent on the internal
“feedback” generated through monitoring, reporting and verification (MRV) processes. The
framework must be able to assess the effectiveness of investment in the whole cycle of drought
management because the mobilization and continuation of financial and technological support
are contingent on the effectiveness of the MRV framework. National, bilateral and multilateral
financial partners and other providers of finance need the results of MRV systems to validate the
effectiveness of funds they provide. Therefore, securing further financial support for the
implementation of the National Drought Plan will be dependent on the successful establishment
and implementation of a MRV framework.
Such an ideal MRV framework for The Gambia should:
1. Build on existing institutions and skills;
2. Take into account the planned disaster management governance structures;
3. Provide guidance on the implementation of drought response actions, whether in the form
of policies, projects, programmes or investment ventures;
57

--- Page 69 ---
4. Help The Gambia fulfil her international reporting obligations;
5. Demonstrate The Gambia’s drought financing readiness; and
6. Provide a strong platform for attracting international climate finance flows from
multilateral and bilateral development partners.
For effective and efficient monitoring, reporting and verification, criteria with quantitative and
qualitative indicators disaggregated according to gender and covering various sectors and levels
of the national economy need to be developed and utilized in the monitoring process. Particular
attention should be paid to coverage of the activity whether it be at the grassroots level
community, sub-national and/or national; agriculture, water resources, ecosystem, etc; local
level, middle-level and high-level decisions-makers and national policy-makers. The monitoring
and evaluation criteria must also include the assessment of the impacts of the activity on the
community and at the national levels such as change in knowledge and awareness on derought
management, improvement in the livelihoods and influence on decision and policy making at the
local and national levels.
Indicators to be developed for the MRV system should include for example institutional adaptive
capacity indicators that provide measures of the effectiveness of national initiatives to build
institutional capacity to address the challenges of drought hazards at the county level such as the
number of Ministries and Departments, Civil Society Organizations, Youth and Women Groups,
Media Agents, etc, that have received training for staff operating at district/county and national
levels on the cost and benefits of the effective drought management. The indicators should also
include vulnerability indicators that may be a mixture of process-based and outcome-based
indicators and should measure the effectiveness of local and national level initiatives to reduce
vulnerability to drought risks at the national level. Such indicators include number of people
(disaggregated according to gender) permanently displaced by droughts and the number of
households that are in need of support such as pipe-borne water and food aid.
58

--- Page 70 ---
11. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The strategies and activities proposed in this National Drought Plan are intended to sustainably
address the historical and projected challenges The Gambia will face and enhance resilience of
the economy and citizensunder increase droughts due to the projected climate change. The
design and implementation of this National Drought Plan set the framework for future strategies
and actions to alleviate the adverse effects of climate change induced droughts, to raise
awareness within the local population about the challenges ahead and to establish Government’s
commitment to work in partnership with the wider community and development partners to
achieve a more sustainable future for the country and her citizens.
As global greenhouse gas emissions are continuing unabated, climate change impacts including
more frequent and intense droughta, are likely to intensify an already precarious situation into
the future. If no action is taken to reduce or minimize expected drought impacts, the costs to
society and the economy will be immense. The The GambiaNational Drought Plan therefore
identifies the sectors that are most vulnerable to climate change induced drought impacts and
proposes interventions to mitigate and respond to these impacts, while promoting climate
change-resilient production systems.
Activities identified in the National Drought Plan require substantial additional and adequate
financial resources for their implementation, and funding is therefore required from both
domestic and international sources. Partnership must be forged and all stakeholders should
mainstream climate and drought management and responsive activities in their programmes and
projects.
While The Gambia stands to benefit immensely from the advanced technology of developed
countries, efforts should be made to support local technology generation and application through
institutional capacity building programmes. Consequently new and additional resources are
needed to support The Gambia’s research, development as well as strengthen academic
institutions that are competent enough to identify and predict drought incidence, time-wise
persistence and termination
Tracking and measuring progress towards achievements in effective drought management in The
Gambia will not be easy because the links between the biophysical, economic and social
relationships are not clearly understood. Ultimately, the objective would be to institute an
ongoing process of policy monitoring and evaluation which could become a tool to increase
collective knowledge about how policies contribute to drought management under a hotter and
dried climate.
59

--- Page 71 ---
REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING
1. Amec Foster Wheeler, 2018: Municipal Drought Management Plan Town of Castle Rock
2. Amidou Garane, (2008): UN Watercourses Convention: Applicability and Relevance in
West Africa.
3. Amie Bensouda & Co, (2013): Improving Land Sector Governance in The Gambia;
Implementation of the Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF)
4. GoTG, 2016: The Identification of The Gambia’s Development Program Priority Needs
in Terms of Disaster Risk Management, Urban Flood and Climate Resilience, May 2016
5. GOTG, 2017: National Development Plan (2018-2021)
6. GOTG/DPWM, 2014: The fifth (5th ) National Report to the Convention of Biological
Diversity
7. GOTG/IFAD, (2015): Strengthening Climate Resilience of the National Agricultural
Land and Water Management Development Project – Chosso, Final project design report
Main report
8. GOTG/IFAD, 2015: Strengthening Climate Resilience of the National Agricultural Land
and Water Management Development Project – Chosso: Final project design report
Appendix 2: Poverty, targeting and gender
9. GOTG/UN-Habitat, 2012: Banjul Urban Profile. UN-Habitat,
10. Mannocchi, F & Francesca, Todisco & Vergni, Lorenzo. (2004): Agricultural drought:
Indices, definition and analysis
11. Mark Schoonmaker Freudenberger, 2000: Tenure and Natural Resources in The Gambia:
Summary of Research Findings and Policy Options
12. NEA, 2014: Addressing Sea & River Defense Risk Management – Law and Policy
Review (p.30)
13. UNCADRI, 2012: Disaster Risk Reduction Capacity Assessment Report, p. 7.
60