--- Page 1 ---
!!!!
""""####$$$$%%%%&&&&####’’’’((((!!!!((((’’’’))))####****((((’’’’""""!!!!’’’’++++))))####****((((!!!!,,,,,,,,&&&&****----&&&&’’’’........%%%%!!!!
))))****!!!!
++++****....$$$$’’’’))))!!!!////%%%%0000%%%%&&&&))))####1111####++++’’’’))))####****((((!!!!
2222333344444444!!!!5555!!!!2222333344446666
SSSSTTTTRRRREEEENNNNGGGGHHHHTTTTEEEENNNNIIIINNNNGGGG CCCCAAAAPPPPAAAACCCCIIIITTTTIIIIEEEESSSS FFFFOOOORRRR SSSSUUUUSSSSTTTTAAAAIIIINNNNAAAABBBBLLLLEEEE
AAAAGGGGRRRRIIIICCCCUUUULLLLTTTTUUUURRRREEEE TTTTOOOO RRRREEEEVVVVEEEERRRRSSSSEEEE TTTTHHHHEEEE TTTTRRRREEEENNNNDDDD OOOOFFFF
LLLLAAAANNNNDDDD DDDDEEEEGGGGRRRRAAAADDDDAAAATTTTIIIIOOOONNNN
Submitted to: Environmental Protection Agency Prepared by: Dr. Henry M. Sibanda
4th Street, Sinkor Jerome Nyenka
Monrovia, Liberia
APRIL, 2011
i

--- Page 2 ---
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Item: Page:
List of Tables iv
List of Figures iv
Acronyms v
Glossary of Terms vii
Executive Summary 1
PART 1 – STRATEGY 5
Introduction 5
1. Overall Vision 7
2. Strategic Objectives and Performance Indicators 7
3. Priority Thematic Interventions 9
4. Priority Areas and Approaches for SLM 11
5. National Action Programme 15
6. Financing 19
7. Integrated Investment Framework 20
8. Key Stakeholders and Roles and Responsibilities 21
9. Monitoring and Evaluation 29
Conclusion 30
PART 2 - NATIONAL ANALYSIS 31
1. Country Context 31
1.1 Socio-Economic Conditions Influencing Land Degradation 31
1.2 Biophysical Conditions 35
2. Analysis of the Causes of Land Degradation 44
2.1 Natural Causes of Land Degradation 44
ii

--- Page 3 ---
2.2 Anthropogenic Causes of Land Degradation 46
2.3 Extent of Land Degradation, Geographical Distribution
and Communities Under Threat 55
2.4 Land Degradation Trends and Geographical Targeting 67
2.5 Costs of Land Degradation 69
3. Community Practices, Previous and Current Programmes,
and Lessons Learned 72
4. Analysis of the Enabling Environment Influencing SLM 73
4.1 Policy Frameworks Influencing SLM 73
4.2 Regulatory Frameworks Influencing SLM 79
4.3 Institutional Context Influencing SLM 85
4.4 National Planning Processes 89
4.5 Coordination Mechanisms Influencing SLM 90
4.6 Incentive Frameworks Influencing SLM 92
5. Past and Current Financial Flows for Natural 93
5.1 Resource Management 93
6. Sources of Financing for SLM 93
6.1 Internal 93
6.2 External 97
6.3 Innovative 100
Conclusion 103
References 113
Annexes
1. Process of NAP Elaboration
iii

--- Page 4 ---
List of Tables
Table 1. Population, Surface Area and Density (1984 and 2008) 32
Table 2 Soils of Liberia 40
Table 3: Average Global Value of Annual Ecosystems Service 70
Table 4: Land Cover Class Environmental Value Weights 71
Table 5: Funds Allocated to Relevant Sectors that Address Land Related Issues 93
Table 6 Table 6. Donor contribution to the Liberian budget. 99
List of Figures
Figure 1. Political Boundaries map 32
Figure 2. Rainfall Map of Liberia 37
Figure 3: Temperature Map of Liberia 38
Figure 4: Destructive Logging Practices: Unselective logging 49
Figure 5: Shifting cultivation 49
Figure 6: Destructive logging; damage to secondary growth and the soil 50
Figure 7: Illicit Mineral Mining in Grand Cape Mount County 51
Figure 8: Deforestation due to refugee / IDP camps 52
Figure 9: Soil erosion in Refugee / IDPs camp 53
Figure 10: Map showing land-use patterns in Liberia in 2004 56
Figure 11: Afforestation nursery 59
Figure 12: LAMCO exploration tunnel (over 30 years) 63
Figure 13: Map showing mineral deposits all over the country 64
Figure 14: Alluvial mining causing extreme environmental degradation 65
Figure 15: Woodfuel causing deforestation 66
Figure 16: Stone quarrying for construction 67
Figure 17: Trends of Deforestation: forest cover over 1180 years 68
Figure18: Mangroves clearing and solid waste dumping to reclaim land in
Paynesville/Congo Town 69
iv

--- Page 5 ---
ACRONYMSs
CARI Central Agricultural Research Institute
CI Conservation International
EPA Environmental Protection Agency
ERADRO Environmental Relief & Development Research Organization
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization
FDA Forestry Development Authority
FFI Fauna and Flora International
GEF Global Environment Facility
IUCN International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources
LDC-SIDS Least Developed Countries-Small Island Developing States
LIFE Liberia Indigenous Forum for the Environment
MDG Millennium Development Goals
MIA Ministry of Internal Affairs
MOA Ministry of Agriculture
MOCI Ministry of Commerce and Industry
MSP Medium Size Project
NAP National Action Programmes
NAPA National Adaptation Program of Action
NBSAP National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan
NCC National Coordinating Committee
NGO Non Governmental Organization
POCAL Pollution Control Association of Liberia
SAMFU Save My Future Foundation
v

--- Page 6 ---
SCNL Society for the Conservation of Nature of Liberia
SDI Sustainable Development Institute
SLM Sustainable Land Management
SOLF Society of Liberian Foresters
UNCBD United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity
UNCCD United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification
UNDP United Nations Development Program
UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
vi

--- Page 7 ---
Glossary of Terms
Ecologically sensitive area – Habitats such as wetlands, aquifer recharge zones,
important wildlife habitats and so forth which are, or might be, sensitive to degradation
or destruction by human activities.
Ecosystem – A functional unit consisting of all the living organisms (plants, animals
and microbes) in a given area, as well as the non-living physical and chemical
factors of their environment, linked together through nutrient cycling and energy
flow. An ecosystem can be of any size – a log, pond, field, forest, or the Earth’s
biosphere – but it always functions as a whole unit. Ecosystems are commonly
described according to the main type of vegetation (e.g. forest ecosystem, range ecosystem).
Ecosystem services value – A measurement of the economic value (expressed in this
instance per hectare per annum) of specific ecosystems such as a wetland or tropical
forest (based on Costanza et al., 1997).
Participation – A process by which stakeholders are active and equal partners in
decision-making, and may have shared ownership and control over project/programme
design and implementation (and also eventual evaluation).
Protected area – Portions of land protected by special restrictions and laws for the
conservation of the natural environment. They include large tracts of land set aside
for the protection of wildlife and its habitat; areas of great natural beauty or unique
interest; areas containing rare forms of plant and animal life; areas representing
unusual geologic formations; places of historic and prehistoric interest; areas containing
ecosystems of special importance for scientific investigation and study; and
areas that safeguard the needs of the biosphere.
Rehabilitation – The full or at least partial restoration of (in this instance) degraded
landscapes and/or impaired ecosystem services to their state prior to human derived degradation.
Vulnerability – The extent to which a community, structure, service or geographic area
is likely to be damaged or disrupted by the impact of a particular hazard (Tobin and
Montz, 1997).
World Heritage Site – A designated and protected site of great cultural significance or
a geographic area of outstanding universal value. Mount Nimba (shared between
Guinea, Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia) is a World Heritage Site recognized by Guinea and
vii

--- Page 8 ---
Côte d’Ivoire, but not by Liberia.
Carrying capacity – Capacity of an ecosystem to support healthy organisms while
maintaining its productivity, adaptability and capability of renewal. OR the number of
animals/people which can be maintained on a given area of land without disturbing the equilibrium
of plant growth and livestock production on the range.
Semi-arid areas – zone receiving 500–1,000mm rainfall annually (arid, sub-humid, humid areas).
Improved Stove – General description for any cooking device designed to reduce energy
consumption. Usually intended for woodfuels as an improvement on traditional open fire systems,
and made with metal, clay, ceramic or a combination.
Insolation – Degree of exposure to the sun’s rays. Important in assessing a site’s potential for solar
cooking.
Afforestation – The establishment of a more-or-less continuous tree cover, normally by planting,
in areas which have previously been without trees.
Agroforestry – Land-use system in which woody perennials are maintained or planted, in some
form of spatial arrangement or temporal sequence, on the same land as agricultural crops and/or
livestock.
Biodiversity – The variety of life on Earth. In practical terms, biodiversity comprises genes,
species and ecosystems. Genetic diversity refers to variations within or between populations of
the same species; species diversity refers to the number of different species (plants, animals or
micro-organisms) in a site habitat; ecosystem diversity refers to the variety of ecosystems,
habitats, forest types or communities, each of which is composed of a distinctive set of genes
and species, and of distinctive elements of soil and climate.
Community forestry – A generic term for forestry where people as user groups, communities and
individuals are the main actors. It includes village woodlot establishment, farm forestry, tree
planting in private fields and joint management of public forests by communities and governments.
Coppicing – Traditional method of forest management in which shoots are allowed to grow up
form the base of a felled tree.
Deforestation – The depletion of tree crown cover to less than 10 per cent.
Desertification – Land degradation in arid, semi-arid and dry sub-humid areas resulting
from various factors, including climatic variations and human activities – total removal
of vegetation cover by agriculture or overgrazing, for example.
viii

--- Page 9 ---
Exotic species – Species introduced from another ecological zone; usually the opposite of
‘indigenous’.
Forest degradation – The change of forest class (from closed to open forest) which
negatively affects the stand or site and lowers production capacity.
Forest management – Development and implementation of plans to protect, enrich,
manipulate and exploit wood and non-wood products from natural or plantation forest
resources.
Harvesting – Involves all activities required in the removal of both timber and non-timber
forest products from the forest, including onsite treatments to prepare the products for
transport to primary processing sites.
Multipurpose tree species – Species providing several different products and benefits, such as
timber, fuelwood, fodder, shelter and soil improvement.
Plantation forests – Forests established artificially, either by afforestation on land which
has not carried forest within living memory or by reforestation of land which carried forest
before but where the indigenous species are replaced with a new species or genetic variety.
Poles – Small-diameter wood used in an unprocessed form for construction, fence posts
and other purposes.
Shifting cultivation – A farming system in which land is periodically cleared, farmed and
then returned to fallow. Synonymous with slash-and-burn and swidden agriculture.
Social forestry – Farm, community and rural development forestry.
Sustainable forest management – The management and use of forests and wooded lands in a
way, and at a rate, that maintains their biodiversity, productivity, regeneration capacity, vitality and
their potential to fulfill, now and in the future, relevant ecological, economic and social functions,
at local, national, and global levels, without causing any damage to other ecosystems.
Sustainable use – Use of an organism, ecosystem or other renewable resource at a rate
commensurate with its capacity for renewal.
Watershed – A watershed or catchment is an area of land with common drainage. It is
considered both as a physical-biological unit and as a socio-economic-political unit for
planning and management of natural resources.
Watershed management – Planning and implementation of natural resource utilisation
in a catchment area, without adversely affecting the soil and water resources.
ix

--- Page 10 ---
Woodland – Open stand of trees up to approximately 18 metres in height in which tree
crowns cover at least 30 per cent of the land area but are, generally, not overlapping.
x

--- Page 11 ---
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Sustainable Land Management (SLM) Strategy
Since desertification is one of the serious causes to land degradation, Liberia signed to be a
member of the UNCCD allowing the implementation of the convention to become a high priority.
Due to the unsustainable agricultural, unsustainable logging practices and unregulated mining
Liberia has become susceptible to climate change which has the following consequences: changes
in rainfall patterns, extreme coastal zone flooding and rise in sea-level.
The overall vision of the SLM program is “the extent and intensity of land degradation will be
significantly reversed” with the following strategic objectives (i) improvement of the standard of
living of the people (ii) improvement of the condition of the affected biodiversity and ecosystems
(iii) contributing to global benefits, (iv) improvement in the mobilization of financial and human
resources. This results in the program having the following priority thematic interventions areas a)
policy and legislation, b) land-use planning c) institutional coordination d) capacity building e)
knowledge management network f) waste management g) SLM mainstreaming h) M & E.
The national action program is an eight (8)year program with the following phases (i) inception
phase or the short-term activities (ii) implementation phase and (iii) the consolidation and
recommendations phase. The financing of the SLM program is a three pronged approach with the
national budgetary allocations playing a major role. This will be complemented by the
external/donor financing as well as the innovative financing mechanisms.
The stakeholders who will work on the SLM program have been divided into the following
categories, Community Based Organizations, Civil Society Organizations, International NGOs,
National NGOs, Research and Academic Institutions, Private Sector and UN organizations.
The M&E is seen as an integral part of the NAP. It will be set up following the toolkit
recommended by the Global Support Unit of UNCCD.
National Analysis
Liberia lies between the longitudes 70 30” and 11030' west and latitude 4018” and 80 30” north, with
an area of 96,160sq km. It is partitioned into 15 counties, with an estimated population 3.6million,
70% of which are rural with an average annual growth of 2.7%. It has a per capita income USD199
and 76% of the population lives below the poverty datum level after the 14 year civil war. This
rural population is heavily dependent on natural resources like forests.
1

--- Page 12 ---
Liberia lies in the West African monsoon climate with rains falling between May and October and
the dry Harmattan winds blowing from the Sahara desert between November and March. The
rainfall ranges from 1700mm in the dry north to over 4500mm in the wet south. The day
temperatures range between 280 – 330C and night temperatures of 240 – 270C. The country is
divided into 4 major agro-ecological zones namely Coastal Plains, Inundated Plateau, Rolling Hills
and Plateau and Mountain zones. The country has the following major soil types, the regosols
forming 20%, latosols forming 75%, the swamps forming 5% of the total.
The Liberian forest is one of the 25 global hotspots. Currently 50% of the country is still covered
with forests and is home to over 2200 flora and fauna species. Currently only 1.3% of the land is
protected namely Sapo National Park and the East Nimba Nature Reserve.
Causes of land degradation
The causes of land degradation are either biophysical or anthropogenic. The potential hazards are
the high intense rainfall totaling over 4770mm a year couple with the high daily temperatures that
cause laterisation of the latosols. The laterite form soil capping which increases runoff resulting in
soil erosion. The regosols are susceptible to water and wind erosion and their high infiltration rates
resulting nutrient leaching leading to infertility and low productivity. Pollution of water bodies and
swamps due to the dumping of solid and liquid waste destroys the breeding grounds for fish and
crustaceans.
The anthropogenic causes of land degradation have the human being at the centre. This is due to
bad policies and laws, lack of land-use plans, knowledge gaps. These have resulted in continued
slash and burning, deforestation, bad mining practices, the destruction of wetlands etc. all these are
fuelled by food insecurity for the human beings. The trend shows that degradation is on the
increase as can be evidenced by increase in deforestation, increase in slash and burn as well as
increase in woodfuel and charcoal use during the civil war when there was no electricity. The cost
of land degradation is a complex subject since it can only be determined indirectly using methods
like the Ecosystems Services Value (ESV). The ESV increases with the increase in land cover with
cropland having the lowest value and the estuaries and mangrove swamps having the highest
values. Alternatively the cost of land degradation can be determined by assessing the total cost of
rehabilitation of degraded land.
2

--- Page 13 ---
Community Practices
Shifting cultivation is the most common practice, but with population increases the fallow periods
have reduced from about 15 years to about 4 or 5years. Since it accounts for 90% of upland
agriculture with this decline in fallow period it is no longer sustainable. (Lesson Learnt: It was a
good system which allowed nutrient recycling, but is now under pressure. Agroforestry fallow
planting can reduce the fallow period to about 3years with no negative impacts on soil fertility).
Lowland agriculture is practiced in Foyah district, Lofa County, as well as in Voinjama, Kolahun,
Zorzor districts. Although lowlands in Liberia only account for 6.1% of the land area very little of
this is utilized.(Lesson Learnt: the swamp soils can be managed effectively so it can be used all
over the country to produce alternative/cash crops without having to cut down any trees in the
process).
Enabling Environment
The government vision for development is spelt out in the Poverty Reduction Strategy(PRS) and
has the following priorities i.e secure, sustainable and equitable growth and to rebuild the
capacities of the Liberian people and to establish responsible institutions. The PRS has 4 pillars
(i)expanding peace and security (ii) revitalizing the economy (iii) strengthening governance and
the rule of law (iv) rehabilitation of infrastructure and delivering basic services.
It is envisaged that the possible entry points for SLM could be in the following ways: in programs
and plans of the Environment Units in all the ministries or through the EPA budget or
mainstreamed into the PRS II due to start in later part of 2011.
The following institutions have been identified to have the mandate to make policies relating to
SLM i.e Environment protection Agency (EPA), Ministry of Agriculture (MOA), Forestry
Development Agency(FDA) and the Ministry of Lands Minerals and Energy (MLME).
The following legislations have been identified to have influence on SLM i.e. National
Environment Policy of Liberia (2003), Environment Protection and Management Law(2003), Act
establishing land Commission (2009), New Forestry Reform Law (2006), Draft Wildlife
Conservation and Protection Areas Management(2009), New Minerals and Mining Law (2002),
Liberia Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative(2009).
Institutional Context: The following is a run-down of institutions that will work hand in hand with
the SLM project and have a role to play in the sustainable management of the land and the natural
3

--- Page 14 ---
resources i.e Land Commission, Min of Agriculture, CARI, Min of Work, Min of Internal Affairs
and Academic Institutions.
Coordination Mechanism: It is envisaged that the SLM will be coordinated in the following
possible ways. It could be coordinated through the existing bodies the Environmental Units found
in all the ministries or through the Agriculture Coordinating Committee, or through the National
Coordinating committee of the UNCCD. It could also be coordinated through the Steering
Committee of SLM, but the Ministry of Finance will have to coordinate the finances through its
External Support Monitoring and Coordination which monitors the donors funds.
Financial Flows for NRM and Sources of Finance
The current government has been increasing the allocation for the sectors that deal with SLM and
related issues. The combined allocation the following agencies EPA, FDA, MOA, MLME, MIA
has steadily increased from mare 5% in 2005 to over 18% in the 2011 budget.
The sources of finance for SLM related activities, comes for wide range of funders who have been
categorized into the following: Internal funding comes from GOL budget allocated to EPA, FDA,
MOA,MLME, MIA and the Land Commission. There is also decentralized budget ie. local
development fund by UNCDF, County Development Fund, US-ADF etc. National NGOs can also
apply for funds for external organization that have indicated interest to fund.
External funding comes from donors who indicated during the Round table process ie World Bank,
EU, AfDB, as well as the main donor the USA as shown in the table 6. Other funders to the SLM
process include CI, IUCN, FFI and Birdlife International. Finally the innovative finance is
inclusive of Civil Society Organizations, private companies and farmers as well as carbon markets
and debt-for nature swaps. All these funders need to be coordinate properly for the SLM program
to succeed.
4

--- Page 15 ---
PART 1 - STRATEGY
INTRODUCTION
Desertification remains a major environmental hazard with adverse impacts on ecosystems and
the livelihoods of people especially in Africa, and has contributed to increasing poverty. The
global concern about the menace of desertification attracted the attention of the United Nations
and after a number of actions to deal with the scourge, in 1994, the United Nations Convention
to Combat Desertification (UNCCD) was adopted and opened for signature. Liberia signed the
Convention on March 3, 1998.
The country committed herself to the terms and conditions of the Convention, and soon began
taking actions for the implementation of her obligations. In October 1998, a National
Coordinating Committee was established, and a National Focal Point appointed.The
implementation of the Convention is now a high priority. The country is well on course with
sustainable poverty reduction and development. Land and forest resources quality and quantity
are central UNCCD. Most of the upland agriculture in Liberia is slash-and-burn. Under current
population densities, it is highly unsustainable and characterized by a continuing decline in soil
fertility and crop yields. Much of the clearing of new forest land for slash-and-burn agriculture is
driven by the need to compensate for these declining yields combined with rapid population
growth of about 3% per year. The continued intensification of slash-and-burn agriculture could
destroy all of the remaining forest land in the country over the next few decades. The ongoing
declines in yields also contribute directly to rural poverty and food insecurity that the country is
experiencing.
The UNCCD provides an excellent platform for addressing land degradation. The adaptation of
its principles and concepts will contribute to the mitigation of land degradation and promote
ecosystem integrity and stability; enhance ecological functions; and strengthen policy, regulatory
and economic incentive frameworks to facilitate wider adoption of sustainable land management
practices across sectors.
Liberia has become susceptible to the adverse effects of climate change. Contributing factors
include ill-adapted agricultural activities, unsustainable logging practices, unregulated coastal
5

--- Page 16 ---
mining, high levels of biomass consumption, and decreasing river flows due to high evaporation.
Each of these contributing factors is further aggravated by inadequate infrastructure, low levels
of social development, population displacement, low institutional capacity, and inadequate
meteorological and hydrological data.
The adverse effects of climate change variability and extreme climatic events are already
significantly impacting sustainable development priorities. Future climate change is expected to
result in an intensification of hazards. These hazards were identified during the NAPA process.
• Changes in rainfall patterns: Preliminary results indicate that average projected rainfall
under climate change conditions will sharply increase from baseline conditions. Results
from some of the models show average rainfall increase of about 684mm/month during
the rainy season. Moreover, temperatures are expected to rise significantly relative to
baseline conditions. By 2050, projected warming ranges from 290C to 320C during
August to 330C to 430C during the month of January. Severe heat waves are expected.
• Extreme coastal flooding events: Increasing climatic variability will likely involve a
greater frequency and intensity of storm surges and torrential rainfall. Overtime, this
would likely result in a redistribution of sediment and lead to loss of beaches, and chronic
storm-related infrastructure damage. Biodiversity would be at increasing risk, as would
key socio-economic activities such as fishing, hunting, farming and harvesting of
periwinkles.
• Sea level rise: Most of Liberia’s population live in close proximity to the coast and
would experience serious consequences from sea level rise. Low-lying lands such as
Bushrod Island, West Point, Cestos City, and many other parts of Liberia will likely be
impacted by direct inundation or submergence. Coastal erosion would also increase, as
would salinity levels or rivers and aquifers.
Vulnerability to climate variability and climate change is already impacting key development
sectors including agriculture, forestry, fisheries and public health. Changes in rainfall patterns
have resulted in low agricultural crops yields as farmers find it difficult to identify the optimal
time to cultivate crops. Higher temperatures facilitate the spread of forest pests, impeding the
growth of certain tree plant species. It is estimated that the combined effects of changing water
6

--- Page 17 ---
temperatures and rainfall patterns are adversely affecting fish stocks in terms of declining levels
of certain species. Changes is rainfall and temperature patterns are expected to lead to increased
levels of water-borne diseases including cholera, giardiasis, dysentery, amebiasis, typhoid, and
malaria, particularly among the rural population.
Liberia being party to the three RIO Conventions: the United Nations Convention on Biological
Diversity (UNCBD), the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)
and the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD) has instituted some
measures to effectively build linkages and synergies to implement these Conventions in a
collaborative manner. It is within the said framework that the National Action Programme is
woven to achieve improved Sustainable Land Management outcomes.
1. OVERALL VISION
Considering the impacts of land degradation in Liberia and conscious that sustainable economic
growth, social development and poverty reduction are current national priorities, and are
essential to meeting sustainability objectives, it is envisaged that eight (8) years after the NAP
implementation, the trend and extent of land degradation would be significantly reversed.
It is also envisioned that upon the implementation of the NAP, the following would also need to
be strengthened; the policy, legal, regulatory and economic incentive frameworks necessary to
facilitate wider adoption of sustainable land management practices across sectors are
strengthened; capacities in both the agricultural and forest management sectors are strengthened;
effective knowledge management network of Sustainable Land Management/agricultural
development institutions and projects is established;sustainable agricultural extension packages
are improved to ensure high agricultural production, food security, and enhanced livelihoods.
SustainableLand Management: An approach to land management that is economically viable, socially
acceptable and environmentally sound.
2. STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE INDICATORS
The following are the strategic objectives for Liberia to achieve Sustainable Land Management
within the eight (8) years of the National Action Plan(NAP). These strategic objectives are based
7

--- Page 18 ---
on the national analysis and are in harmony with the UNCCD 10 year strategic objectives and
indicators.
Strategic Objective 1: Improvement of the standard of living of the people in the areas
affected by the land degradation and its associated Negative impacts.
Intended impact 1.1: People living in degraded lands have improved and diversified livelihoods
and benefit from SLM
Indicator 1.1: A decrease in the number of people living in degraded lands in Liberia
Intended Impact 1.2: Population in Liberia affected socially, economically and environmentally by
climate change and variability reduced
Indicator 1.2: Number of persons living below the poverty datum line reduced in the
affected areas in Liberia.
Strategic Objective 2: Improvement of the condition of the affected biodiversity within its
habitats and affected ecosystems within the political boundaries of Liberia and its political
sphere like the Liberian air space and the Liberia’s continental shelf.
Intended Impact 2.1: Land productivity and ecosystems goods and services in affected areas in
Liberia will be enhanced in a sustainable manner.
Indicator 2.1: Reduction in total area under desertification or land degradation
Intended impact 2.2: Vulnerability of ecosystems to climate variability reduced.
Indicator 2.2: Increase ecosystems productivity of affected areas in Liberia
Strategic Objective 3: Generation of the global benefits like improve biodiversity in the
regional and reductions in climate change accrue from the implementation of the NAP on
SLM
Intended Impact 3.1: Sustainable land management contribute to conservation and sustainable use
of biodiversity and the mitigation of climate change.
Indicator 3.1: Increase carbon sinks / trees or carbon stocks/soil and plant biomass in the
degraded areas
Intended Impact 3.2: Biodiversity hotspots are sustainably managed
Indicator 3.2: Well managed biodiversity hotspots attract more tourists annually
8

--- Page 19 ---
Strategic Objective 4: Mobilization of resources financial and human for the implementation
to the SLM, NAP are effected through partnerships bilaterally and multilaterally as well as
within the country
Intended Impact 4.1:More financial, technical and human resources are made available to Liberia
through global mechanism and other ways
Indicator 4.1: Increase in the level and diversity of available funding for Liberia
Intended Impact 4.2: enabling policy environment is improved for implementation of SLM and
related programs
Indicator 4.2 : Development of policies for SLM implementation and mitigation of climate
change
2. PRIORITY THEMATIC INTERVENTIONS
Considering the national situation analyses carried out, it is expected that the priorities below will
address community and ecological needs as well as challenges associated with the enabling policy,
regulatory and incentive frameworks; and meet other objectives of related Multilateral
Environmental Agreements:
(a) Policy and legislations on Sustainable Land Management (SLM)
Areas of concentration will include revision of existing policies and legislations, and picking up
lessons from the Land Commission with the aim of determining which legislations hinder or
facilitate SLM implementation in order to fill in the gaps. Issues surrounding Land Tenure will
also form a major focus.
(b) Land Use Planning
The SLM implementation will be guided by a national Land Use Plan, which will be tapping from
the existing land uses but focusing on land suitability and sustainability and taking on board
climate change issues. In the absence of such plans, existing regional and local land use plans will
be followed. There shall be efforts to carry out rudimentary land suitability assessment nationwide
to enhance and expedite the process.
(c) Institutional Coordination
9

--- Page 20 ---
The primary activity will be to formulate an approach that will make coordination of SLM
effective and bring the will of various stakeholder institutions to an appreciable level and have
them take ownership of the process. The issue of financing and institutional capabilities will be
addressed and coordination modalities worked out.
(d) Capacity Building at all Levels
There shall be a comprehensive capacity needs assessment at policy, institutional, local community
and individual levels followed by capacity building initiatives to address the capacity gaps.
(e) Monitoring and Evaluation System
In order to facilitate an effective monitoring and evaluation regime, an M & E system will be
designed; presided by a baseline data collection, and key indicators determined.
(f) Knowledge Management Network
This will focus on public information dissemination; development of extension packages to support
SLM Implementation in identified sectors; design of dissemination system; collaboration with
training and research institutions to mainstream SLM into various curricula and programs.
(g) Support to Trans-boundary Natural Resources Management
This will focus on issues that will require a wider audience than the people within the political
boundaries of Liberia. This is an issue necessitated by the fact that to achieve success or make an
impact on the global scene, it necessary to collaborate with others in the same region who share
similar resources. This will deal with issues connected to watersheds, air and water pollution i.e.
upstream downstream issues and so on.
(h) Support to the Waste management
This will focus on the issues related to air and water pollution all over the country since a neglect
in this aspect will result in the undoing of a number of advances that might have been made in
other areas like forest management etc. It will also focus on issues of waste disposal of liquid, solid
and gaseous waste without producing adverse effects in the areas of disposal and the surrounding
areas. It will achieve this by taking on board technologies like the Clean Development Mechanisms
10

--- Page 21 ---
(CDM). This support will be all encompassing from policy and legal framework development on
waste management to capacity development.
(k) Mainstreaming of SLM
This will focus on the mainstreaming of SLM into all the sectors that have an impact on the land
and its resources.These sectors include agriculture, forestry, mining, energy, local government but
are not limited to these only. In summary this would be mainstreaming SLM into the Poverty
Reduction Strategy (PRS) which is looked at as an all-encompassing strategy for the Government
of Liberia.
4. PRIORITY AREAS AND APPROACHES FOR SLM
An Integrated Ecosystems Management approach to address the social, economic and ecological
issues within the carrying capacity of the ecosystems will be achieved through the government’s
all-encompassing Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS). This is a strategy that brings together the
entire government by making the people of Liberia’s well being and welfare the centre of the
development agenda of the country. A simplistic analysis of the problem would easily say that
poverty leads to degradation as people extract more and more natural resources and this in turn
leads to a reduction or a decline in the welfare of the people. The strategy has to take cognizance
of the fact that it doesn’t matter which way one looks at it, the human being is at the centre of the
problem and hence he has to be put at the centre of the solution if the approach is to succeed. The
complex relationship simply says a hungry man will move into the forest / his environment and
help himself with as much as he can by extracting the products of the forestry/environment. This
scenario has been exacerbated by the population increase. Whilst man has to fill these many
stomachs, he has to avoid being too heavily dependent on natural resources. Therefore the PRS
emphases that above all the development that aims at improving the wellbeing of the Liberian
people, this development should be done in a sustainable way to ensure that the future generations
have their wellbeing catered for as well. In the same token this is what Sustainable Land
management is all about as has been defined in the EPA to be “an idea or strategy that is globally
employed to improve and sustain the productive capacity of the land thereby supporting the food
production, biodiversity conservation and eco systems functions and services. It can also be
defined as “An approach to land management that is economically viable, socially acceptable
11

--- Page 22 ---
and environmentally sound. Or simply a way of managing land that allows the present
generation to produce and enjoy the benefits without curtailing the future generations from
enjoying the same benefits”. The common factors between the two definitions are that the
wellbeing of the people has to be improved and the ecosystem or land on which this is dependant
on has to be kept intact or remain in a state that would not jeopardize the wellbeing of the future
generations. Therefore the high similarity between these two concepts makes it opportune for them
to be planned together and implemented together.
Definition: Ecosystem Approach (EA): A strategy for the integrated management of land, water and
living resources that promotes conservation and sustainable use in an equitable way.
The strategy will address the three pillars of Sustainable land management i.e. social, economic
and ecological. It will use the Land-User Role Approach where the focus primarily looks at what
the land user is intending to produce or do, how is he/she doing it and why are they doing it that
way. (The land user approach focuses on increasing his/her benefits/productivity in the short-term
through either increased extraction rate or increased inputs like fertilizers and pesticides, which
then threatens the basis of production i.e. the environment/land) It would then analyze his/her
economic and social benefits from the system and what impact is he/she making on the
environment. Hence it will desist from the usual Top-down and technical based approach which
has always led to the failure of most programmes and projects. It will then zero down on
information transfer to the land user on the how to improve his wellbeing (economic and social)
and how he/she can reduce the negative impacts on the land/environment.
The four main land users in this context are the farmer, the miner, forester and the urban dweller,
which then zeros down the primary partners to be the Ministries of Lands, Mines and Energy,
Agriculture and the Forestry Development Authority and Local Government. Going back to the
principle of putting the user at the centre of the whole process, the needs of each of the these land
users would now be looked into and how they are guided and governed by the sector, which would
then necessitates the revision of the sector policies, legal frame works and regulations.
The approach will also focus on the land issues like the tenure, the ownership, and access or user
right issues. It has to take into cognizance the fact that what is referred to as State Land is actually
12

--- Page 23 ---
the “Commons” and this has always been the zone of conflict. In reality, the four land users are
competing on the land, so the approach has to take off that potential friction between the users and
turn it into complementarity. They have to learn to live side by side by respecting each other’s
activities and boundaries. The land tenure issues should make the landuser feel secure and have a
sense of belonging in order to make him/her appreciate his environment and want to protect it for
himself and his generations thereafter. The strategy will also complement the Land Commission’s
work by adopting and implementing the land-use plan they are working on, which will encompass
the land suitability and current land uses in the country.
The priority areas of intervention will be grouped into the following programmes or clusters
to enable the programme achieve its objectives.
Capacity Building and mainstreaming of SLM: This will be done within the 6 targeted ministries
and agencies which have a major stake in the management of land. SLM will also be mainstreamed
into NGOs, Private Sector right up to the community level and the capacity built.
Policy and legal Framework: It will also assist agencies to synchronize and make in-depth
analysis on the enabling environment in terms of policy and legal frameworks as well as
regulations.
Adherence to the Land-Use Plan: The approach will take into cognizance the current work of the
Land Commission, i.e. of producing the Land-Use Map of Liberia, and then SLM will be
mainstreamed into it.
Mainstreaming SLM into the Agriculture Sector: This will involve introducing SLM approaches
into all types of agriculture like Shifting cultivation, rangeland management, commercial farming
etc
Mainstreaming SLM into Forests, Woodlands and Wetlands: This will incorporate SLM
approaches into the forest logging operations, the management of the forests, woodlands and
wetlands.
13

--- Page 24 ---
SLM mainstreamed into Protected Areas and Biodiversity Conservation Areas: This will involve
the introduction of more sustainable approaches for Protected Areas and special approaches to
species conservation.
SLM into Remediation and Rehabilitation Areas: This will be a two step process of first
rehabilitating the damage which could be in a mining area or forest areas etc and then instituting a
management regime for the area.
Targeted Research for SLM: This will involve the research into socio-economic and biophysical
aspects of the land degradation and the management aspects of all the sectors and areas that will be
brought under the SLM programme. It is an indispensible part of the program.
SLM into the Integrated Land Management system: This will look into the areas that will require
a concerted effort from many sectors e.g. watershed approach to stabilize the area in terms of
forest, water conservation, rangeland conservation etc. This might even require the involvement of
transnational partners. It has to be noted hear that Traditional Land use practices will be dealt with
in this section to complement the current methods since these are practices that have withstood the
test of time.
Mainstreaming SLM into the National Coordination of the Program: This is an essential part of
the operation, that will bring together the various implementing agencies on a regular basis, as well
as help to define the roles and responsibilities of the different agencies, as well as defining the
monitoring aspects for each agency. The already existing Agriculture Coordinating Committee
(ACC) will be part of the coordination system and will lend its experience to the process.
14

--- Page 25 ---
5. NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMME
Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3
PROGRAMME /YEAR 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
1.CAPACITY BUILDING – (A) Improving The enabling Environment
1.1.Capacity to mainstream SLM into the 6 major GOL institutions improved. (Min of Agric, Min Internal 
Affairs, Min of Lands Mines and Energy, Land Commission,Forestry Dev. Authority, Environ. Protection
Agency) also into Research institutions and extension services
1.2. Capacity to mainstream SLM into all relevant sectors of the communities improved(Awareness)
1.3. Capacity to mainstream SLM into all others organizations ie NGOs, CBOs etc improved
1.4 Capacity to mainstream SLM into the school curricula improved (primary and secondary&traditional)
1.CAPACITY BUILDING-(B) Improvement of the Policy and legal frameworks
1.5 The policy environment for SLM implementation improved
1.6 Gender aspects incorporated into the SLM process
1.7The legal environment for SLM implementation improved (laws on bush fires, bush meat trade)
1.8 Enforcement unit on biodiversity conservation established
1.CAPACITY BUILDING – (C) Adhering to the Land Use Plan of Liberia
1.8 Production of a national Land use Plan ensured
1.9 Mainstreaming the SLM into the national land use plan facilitated
1.10 Socio-economic Environment for mainstreaming SLM into Poverty Reduction improved
2.Establish a Sustainable Agricultural production System
2.1 SLM is mainstreamed into the shifting cultivation system
2.2 Sustainable Agroforestry technologies introduced as alternative
2.3 Conservation technologies mainstreamed into dryland commercial farming
2.4 A sustainable irrigation agriculture farms established
2-5 A sustainable lowland/swamp cultivation technologies introduced
2.6 A sustainable range management system is established
3.Establishing a Sustainable Forestry management System
3.1. A Sustainable forestry harvesting code is implemented
3.2 Post harvest remedial measures instituted
3.3 A Sustainable post logging forest management system is established
15

--- Page 26 ---
3.4 Special measures for the protection of certain tree species during and after logging instituted
3.5 A woodland management regime established for the forest sector
3.6 A Sustainable wetland forest management regime instituted
3.7 A viable community forest management system established
3.8 A sustainable afforestation program established for the advancing savannah region
3.9 A countrywide sustainable reforestation programme instituted
4.Sustainable Management for the Protected Areas and Biodiversity conservation Areas
4.1 All Protected Areas and Biodiversity conservation Areas legally instituted
4.2 All Protected Areas and Biodiversity Conservation Areas demarcated on the ground
4.3 A buffer zone system is established for all Protected Areas and Biodiversity Conservation Areas
4.4 A Sustainable ecosystem management approach is implemented for each areas
4.5 A community based resources management system is established for the buffer zones
4.6 Specific Species conservations measures established where necessary for these areas
5 Remediation / Rehabilitation of Degraded Lands
5.1 Degraded lands identified throughout the country
5.2 Causes for the degradation those areas established by research
5.3 Remediation and management of Industrial degraded lands instituted
5.4 Remediation and management of agriculture degraded land instituted
5.5 Remediation and management of forestry degraded lands instituted
5.6 Land polluted with urban waste rehabilitated and managed in a sustainable way
5.7 Land degraded due to mining activities rehabilitated and sustainably managed
6.Targetted Research for All Sectors
6.1 Economic, social and poverty related research instituted
6.2 Research into climatic and agricultural issues instituted
6.3 Research into forestry activities instituted
6.4 Research into the activities of the protected areas and biodiversity conservation areas instituted
6.5 Research carried out into the different mining activities
6.6 Research and monitoring of the advancing desert carried out
6.7 research into the effects of the urban and various industrial waste instituted
7.Instituting Integrated Land Management Systems
7.1 Areas for integrated land management approach identified through the country
7.2Watershed management systems introduces in the illicit mining watersheds
16

--- Page 27 ---
7.3 Integrated land management systems instituted for different types of wetlands
7.4 Integrated land management approach for the former refuge and IDP camps
7.5 Traditional/indigenous
8.Knowledge management
8.1 Knowledge management network established
8.2 Network of people promoting Best Practices on S.L.M created
8.3 Economic incentives on SLM implemented
8.4 Sustainable Traditional /Indigenous knowledge systems documented and uploaded
8.5 Coping mechanisms to Climate Change adaptation improved and uploaded into the knowledge network
9.National Program Coordination and Management for the SLM
9.1 A national coordination mechanism is established
8.2 A Program Management unit established
10. Monitoring and Evaluation of SLM
10.1 M & E system designed
10.2 Baseline data collected for M&E
10.3 M & E Implemented
17

--- Page 28 ---
PILOT PROJECTS
The pilot projects that will be carried out during the inception or phase 1 of the SLM’s 8 year
period will be carried out in the areas selected for being so badly degraded. The pilot areas were
geographically selected and associated with priority communities of our interventions which are
based on the phased activities of the work plan. The priority areas for the inception phase are as
follows and will constitute the pilot projects.
PILOT PROJECT 1: SLM mainstreamed
PILOT PROJECT 2: SLM into Forestry
in to Agriculture
management
In one, two or all of the identified sites in the
In these degraded forests sustainable re-
districts listed below, pilot projects on how to
afforestation projects will be carried out to re-
ru n different types of sustainable agriculture
establish forests or plantations and a
production systems will be established. These
sustainable management system that could be
could either be carried out on crop or
used as a best practice in the future put into
livestock production or even horticultural
place.
activities. Since the identified sites are badly
Degraded Forest Areas:
degraded lands due to agriculture, theses will
-Cestos/Senkwen forests areas in
be brought back into production in a
Rivercess/Sinoe Counties
su stainable manner.
-Kumbo forest in Gbapolu County
Agriculture degraded Areas:
-Morweh District in Rivercess County
-Foya District in Lofa County
-Tratweh District in Sinoe County
-Gibi District in Margibi County
-Zoe-Geh District in Nimba County
-Salala District in Bong County
-Clay District in Bomi County
PILOT PROJECT 3: SLM into the Mining PILOT PROJECT 4: SLM into Urban
sector Areas
These are areas with different types of These will be urban areas with different types
degradation due to mining activities, hence the of land degradation either due pollution
pilo t projects in these areas will establish the resulting from Air or Liquid or Solid waste.
causes of the degradation and establish a These areas will be rehabilitated and managed
reh abilitation methods and sustainable in a sustainable way.
management regimes
Deg raded Mining Areas: Degraded Urban Areas:
-Weasua in Gbama in Gbapolu County -Mangrove swamps in Sinkor and
-Sapo National Par k in Sinoe County Pennysville in Monrovia
-Zolowee in Geipa in Nimba County -Sand beaches around the Hotel Africa
-Government Camp in Gbokongedeh in Sinoe and former OAU village in Monrovia
County -Seaport in Buchanan in Grand Bassa
county
-Town of Gbanga in Bong county
-Town of Zwedru in Grand Gedeh
County
18

--- Page 29 ---
6. FINANCING
It is expected that during the national budgetary process, the Government of Liberia will allocate at
least half the funds required for the implementation of the NAP on Sustainable Land Management.
Line ministries and agencies having specific tasks and responsibilities shall also budget for NAP.
Donors from Round Table Process, who have shown interest in environmental, agricultural, forest
and other SLM related areas are expected to finance the bulk of the SLM budget. The donors who
showed interest are as follows EU, AfDB, Germany, Denmark, Norway, Sweden, USA, World
Bank while the interested NGOs are as follows FFI, CI, IUCN, in the UN System there are as
follows UNDP, UNEP, UNHCR, WFP and other partners have allocated financial resources for the
implementation of the SLM NAP related activities in accordance with their roles and
responsibilities as spelt out in the strategy. In order to attract funding outside government
budgetary allocations, a modality for aligning donor priorities with national priorities will be put in
place through the Poverty Reduction Strategy II (PRS).
The Government of Liberia will enter into bilateral arrangements and partnerships with national
and international NGOs, UN agencies, community based organizations (CBOs), and the private
sector for their participation in the implementation of the NAP. This could either be by
mainstreaming of Sustainable Land Management into bilateral and multilateral development
assistance programs or by direct co-financing.
Innovative Financing ways: Since the EPA will coordinate the entire financing strategies for
SLM program, under this section it will coordinate the national NGOs to source funding from
external organizations and international NGOs to supplement the government budget and the donor
funding. The activities for national NGOs will focus on specific areas in the country or specific
issues eg funds from Cities Alliance could be used for the management of cities. The following are
other organizations which will are earmarked for the financing of national NGOs: Toyota
Environment Grant, European Development Fund(EDF), African Development Fund (ADF),
African Enterprise Challenge Fund (AECF). EPA will train them in the preparation of project
proposals for specific organizations.
The other innovative ways of finance the implementation of SLM will focus on the debt-for-nature
swaps, carbon markets to protect the remaining Equatorial Guinea forest in Liberia. Conservation
19

--- Page 30 ---
easements, fines for negatively impacting on the environment as well as punitive incentives to
prevent damage to the environment eg the polluter-pays-principle will be gazetted and enforced as
per the provisions in the Liberia’s Environmental Law of 2004. Also private sector companies and
farmers will be encouraged to finance specific SLM related aspects in the locality or issues that
teach them to put something back to the environment. This approach is geared at getting the whole
nation involved in SLM and to make it part of every person’s life.
7. INTEGRATED INVESTMENT FRAMEWORK
Presently, the Short-term funding sources and plans for UNDP-GOL-EPA driven programs will be
financed and implemented by the sector ministries, NGOs with SLM geared programs as can be
seen in the projected donor allocations for the 2010/11budget in the table below (not clear). Each
ministry and government agency will be assisted by EPA and the project staff on how to
reprioritizes part of their budgets towards SLM activities without having any negative impacts on
their other budgeted activities. Private Sector will be engaged to finance specific activities to
complement the government and donor funding as well as engage them in adopting SLM friendly
approaches and technologies in whatever they do. This will be linked to incentives for the private
sector and communities to commit themselves to SLM.
National Action Plan for SLM 2011 to 2018
The 8 year SLM programme of work will be divided into three phases, i.e. Phase 1 or Short-term
Activities that are expected to take place in the first 2years, Phase 2 or the Medium-term Activities
will be 4 years and Phase 3 or the Long-term Activities will be the last 2years of the program.
PHASE 1: Short term Year 1&2: The Inception phase will cover the following activities.
-Rationalize the Policy and legal frameworks
-Capacity building of 6 ministries and agencies –carry out needs assessment at agencies HQ
and local levels
-Design M&E for the SLM program
-Baseline data collection for M&E
-4 small pilot projects in the four areas i.e. agriculture, forest, mining, urbanization
-Start the Coordination of agencies
20

--- Page 31 ---
It is envisaged that the activities in phase 1 will be financed mainly from the existing
government and donor allocations with a little financing from UNDP/GEF to bridge the gap
between the NAP preparation phase and the main NAP implementation phase. Phase 1 is an
enabling period to keep the SLM momentum going while the government is refocusing its
budget for the SLM period and that one of the donors and other partners. The project staff will
produce a modest interim budget for UNDP/GEF to finance those activities while the rest of the
finances should be coming from the existing ministry and agency budgets for the next two years.
PHASE 2: Medium term Year 3 to 6: Implementation phase will cover the following activities
-Capacity building – counties, districts, communities
-SLM mainstreamed into Land use planning activities
-SLM mainstreamed into Agriculture production
-SLM mainstreamed into Forestry and Woodlands and Wetlands activities
-SLM mainstreamed into Protected Areas and Biodiversity conservation Areas management
-SLM mainstreamed into Remediation Sites activities
-Continue Coordination SLM activities
-Research into needed aspects
-SLM mainstreamed into Integrated Land Management Systems
-M&E implementation
PHASE 3: Long term Year 7 & 8: Consolidation phase will cover the following activities.
-All activities brought to a conclusion
-Documentation of lessons learnt
-Knowledge consolidation and dissemination.
8. KEY STAKEHOLDERS AND ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Several stakeholders, groups including Community Based Organizations, Civil Society
Organizations, academic and research institutions, the private sector, and international and
national NGOs, and some development partners are expected to participate in the SLM process.
The following are some of the organizations that are known to have been engaged in SLM
related activities or have shown interest in SLM activities.
21

--- Page 32 ---
8.1 Community Based Organizations
Liberia Community Development Foundation (LCDF)
Working with local communities in disseminating appropriate information and piloting projects
to enable them alleviate poverty and secure lasting improvement in their quality of lives.
Grand Gedeh Community Servant Association (GECOMSA)
Based in Southeastern Liberia, GECOMSA is the forerunner of community-based initiatives to
promote the sustainable management of wildlife through a sustained awareness campaign and
identification of alternative programs. They conduct campaigns on sustainable bush meat
consumption. They are involved in bush meat consumption awareness and sustainable
development in Southeastern Liberia, as well as environmental education in Grand Geddeh and
River Gee Counties.
Civil Society Organizations:
Save My Future Foundation (SAMFU)
The Foundation’s mission is to promote sustainable development of Liberia’s natural and human
resources. The activities are mostly community-based, involving indigenous and local
community people. SAMFU’s major technique is the participatory rural appraisal method.
Association of Environmental Lawyers (GREEN ADVOCATES) INC.
The Association works with stakeholders in Liberia to promote environmental protection and
provides primarily but not exclusively, legal support to green groups and parties who suffer
environmental inequity. It also advances creative ideas and innovative strategies for biodiversity
conservation and sustainable livelihood options such as ecotourism, scientific research
concession, and conservation.
Sustainable Development Institute (SDI)
SDI gathers and disseminates information on sustainable development approaches and works
with relevant stakeholder groups to achieve sustainability objectives. It is based in Monrovia but
works nationally
8.2 National Non-governmental Organizations:
22

--- Page 33 ---
Society for the Conservation of Nature of Liberia (SCNL)
SCNL conducts research on natural heritage of Liberia and makes the results widely public.
SCNL promotes conservation of the forest and associated resources, especially wildlife. It also
has expertise in bio-monitoring and socio-economic surveys.
Farmers Associated to Conserve the Environment (FACE)
This organization endeavors to empower local farmers in appropriate farming practices that are
sustainable and environmentally ethical. FACE is involved in seed rice multiplication and
mangrove conservation.
Society Against Environmental Degradation (SAED)
SAED promotes environmental awareness, education and action oriented projects in urban and
grass-rooted communities. SAED is involved in working in wetlands and water birds
management, promoting the alternative sources of energy.
Liberia Indigenous Forum for the Environment (LIFE)
LIFE strives to work with local communities to bring about awareness and empowerment on
matters of environmental and conservation concerns. One of its major thrusts is to ensure that
traditional knowledge is respected and maintained in Liberia, and promoted in conservation of
biodiversity, especially promotion of medicinal plants.
Center for Environmental Education and Protection (CEEP)
CEEP has the mission to contribute to poverty reduction through environmental education and
public awareness, lobby and advocacy in sustainable development. CEEP has been engaged in
teaching principles and concepts of environment in schools and the communities.
Environmental Relief and Development Research Organization (ERADRO)
ERADRO is involved with the promotion of extension services in the field to identify and
resolve environmental health problems. Its activities include research, social mobilization,
animation of health/hygiene education, solid/domestic waste programmes in schools and
communities.
23

--- Page 34 ---
Enviro-link Liberia, Ltd
This organization links people and communities to the environment through advocacy,
awareness, education, training and research. It is also involved in environmental impact
assessment in collaboration with the EPA and other environmental institutions.
Pollution Control Association of Liberia (POCAL)
POCAL is involved in advocacy for waste management and disposal and organizes nature clubs
in schools and supports drama clubs in communities. I has also established a botanic garden, in
Johnsonville, Montserrado County.
8.3 Research and Academic Institutions:
University of Liberia
The University of Liberia attracts many hard-core professionals in the Colleges of Science and
Technology, Agriculture and Forestry and the Business and Public Administration. The College
of Science and Technology offers bachelor’s degree in biology, zoology, engineering, chemistry,
geology, physics and mathematics. The College of Agriculture and Forestry offers bachelor’s
degree in agronomy, general agriculture, general forestry, wood science and technology, while
home sciences and community development are offered by the College of Medicine. The
College of Liberal and Fine Arts, the College of Business and Public Administration offers
bachelor’s degree in accounting, management, economics and public administration.
Cuttington University College
The Cuttington University College in Central Liberia offers bachelor’s degree in general science,
biology, chemistry, physics and mathematics. Other relevant courses offered in the area of
biodiversity are agriculture and integrated rural development.
Stella Maris Polytechnic
It conducts bachelor’s degree in health sciences (including degree in nursing), engineering,
business management, and accounting.
United Methodist University (UMU)
24

--- Page 35 ---
The mission statement of UMU is “to provide quality education within a Pan African context
through which persons can acquire general and professional knowledge and skills within the
framework of Christian values and ethics. This level of education is built on the foundation of
Christian and moral principals”.
Society of Liberian Foresters (SOLF)
SOLF conducts research in forest and forest products utilization and creates public awareness
about the economic, environmental, aesthetic, cultural and recreational values of the forest
resources through education. It prioritizes wider stakeholders’ participation especially rural and
forest dwellers in forestry management.
8.4 International Non-governmental Organizations:
Conservation International (CI):
CI utilizes science, economics, policy, and community involvement to promote biodiversity
conservation in tropical rain forests and other endangered ecosystems worldwide. CI works in 23
countries in Latin America, Africa, and the Asia Pacific Region. It is a field-based, non-profit
organization that protects the Earth’s biologically richest areas.
Flora and Fauna International (FFI)
The FFI’s role is to conserve threatened species and ecosystems worldwide, choosing solutions
that are sustainable and are based on sound science and takes account of human needs. The
institution has been conserving wildlife in Liberia since 1996 when it contributed to restarting
management of Sapo National Park, following the civil war of the 1990s.
World Vision International (WVI)
World Vision is a Christian relief, development and advocacy organization dedicated to working
with children, families and communities to overcome poverty and injustice. Inspired by
Christian values, WVI is dedicated to working with the world’s most vulnerable people.
WVI serves all people regardless of religion, race, ethnicity or gender and is an international
partnership of Christians whose mission is to “follow our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ in
25

--- Page 36 ---
working with the poor and oppressed to promote human transformation, seek justice and bear
witness to the good news.”
Catholic Relief Services (CRS)
Catholic Relief Services carries out the commitment of the Bishops of the United States to assist
the poor and vulnerable overseas. They are motivated by the Gospel of Jesus Christ to cherish,
preserve and uphold the sacredness and dignity of all human life, foster charity and justice, and
embody Catholic social and moral teaching as they act to:
• Promote human development by responding to major emergencies, fighting disease and
poverty, and nurturing peaceful and just societies; and,
• Serve Catholics in the United States as they live their faith in solidarity with their
brothers and sisters around the world.
As part of the universal mission of the Catholic Church, CRS works with local, national and
international Catholic institutions and structures, as well as other organizations, to assist people
on the basis of need, not creed, race or nationality.
8.5 PRIVATE SECTOR:
Liberia Agriculture Company
Liberia Agriculture Company operates a rubber plantation in Grand Bassa County and has
developed pasturelands and once dealt in raising cattle. The company develops rubber clones for
its own use.
Firestone Plantations Company
Established in 1926, Firestone Plantations Company operates the world’s single largest rubber
plantation at Harbel in Margibi County. It establishes nursery for rubber clones and once was
involved in botanical research and owns and operates the largest private hydro electric plant in
the county.
8.6 United Nations Agencies:
UNDP
26

--- Page 37 ---
The six (6) pillar is of UNDP’s mission are to fight poverty, build good governance, engage in
crisis prevention and recovery, combat HIV/AIDS, gender mainstreaming in development and
environmental sustainability and rational management of natural resources. Within the
framework of the Convention on Biological Diversity, UNDP in Liberia is one of the three
implementing agencies for the Global Environment Facility (GEF) to assist countries to meet the
challenges they face in conserving their various environments. The other two are the United
Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and the World Bank. UNDP implemented the
process, but went slightly beyond the call of duty. Aside from project funds, UNDP provided a
field vehicle for the project and later provided office space for the staff and consultants. At this
stage of Liberia’s history, coming from a long conflict, which now involves United Nations
Peacekeeping for Liberia, the country will definitely continue to look up to UNDP for support to
biodiversity conservation.
UNHCR
UNCHR is the agency within the United Nations System responsible for refugees. It was
established to respond to and address refugee crises that have evolved over the years. The
primary objective of UNHCR is to ensure respect and active recognition for the basic human
rights of refugees, including the ability to seek asylum, and to help make certain that no refugees
are returned involuntarily to a country where they have reason to fear persecution. UNHCR
established its presence in Liberia in 1991. Since then, the nature of UNHCR’s operations in the
country has evolved and adapted to address the variety of humanitarian challenges that have
faced Liberia. UNHCR is expected to respond to the need for rehabilitating lands degraded as a
result of refugees and internal displacement.
FAO
The FAO is mainly responsible for promotion of agriculture, with emphasis on food security.
FAO ensures that the quest for food security does not compromise sustainable development.
FAO has been involved in a national forestry programme, and they served on the steering
committee to the project. Assistance will be needed from FAO to enhance agriculture
productivity and forestry reform.
27

--- Page 38 ---
UNESCO
UNESCO is involved in the conservation of biodiversity by providing support to education and
training on the importance of environment and biodiversity, which should be incorporated in
school curricula and research programmes. UNESCO has funded the tri- national meetings
involving Guinea, Liberia and Ivory Coast for the conservation of Mount Nimba, and contributed
in efforts for Liberia’s accession to the World Heritage Convention in 2002.
United Nations Environment Program (UNEP)
The United Nations Environment Program was established in 1972, as the voice for the
environment within the United Nations system. UNEP acts as a catalyst, advocate, educator and
facilitator to promote the wise use and sustainable development of the global environment.
To accomplish this, UNEP works with a wide range of partners, including other United Nations
entities, international organizations, national governments, non-governmental organizations, the
private sector and civil society.
UNEP mission is to provide leadership and encourage partnership in caring for the environment
by inspiring, informing, and enabling nations and peoples to improve their quality of life without
compromising that of future generations. Its priorities are: Climate Change, Disasters and
Conflicts, Ecosystem Management, Environmental Governance, Harmful Substances and
Resource Efficiency. To date UNEP has sponsored a number of studies and research into
environmental aspects including the first State of Environment Report for Liberia.
United Nations World Food Program (WFP)
The World Food Programme is the world's largest humanitarian agency fighting hunger
worldwide. In emergencies, WFP get food to where it is needed, saving the lives of victims of
war, civil conflict and natural disasters. After the cause of an emergency has passed, WFP uses
food to help communities rebuild their shattered lives.WFP is part of the United Nations system
and is voluntarily funded.
Established in 1962, WFP pursues a vision of the world in which every man, woman and child
has access at all times to the food needed for an active and healthy life. It works towards that
28

--- Page 39 ---
vision with other sister UN agencies in Rome -- the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO)
and the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) -- as well as other government,
UN and NGO partners.
In 2010 WFP aimed to reach more than 90 million people with food assistance in more than 70
countries. Around 10,000 people work for the organization, most of them in remote areas,
directly serving the hungry poor. During the past Civil Wars in Liberia and Sierra Leone WFP
has continuously provided food for the Sierra Leone refugees and Liberian IDPs.
9. MONITORING AND EVALUATION
The Monitoring & Evaluation will proceed using the toolkit provided by the Global Support
Unit. An Annual Project Review Form will be completed and submitted to the UNDP-CO each
year for review and subsequent transmittal to the Global Support Unit. The Annual Project
Review Form, which must be filled out in its entirety, will provide information regarding project
identifiers, impact and performance monitoring, adherence to GEF conditions, project processes
monitoring, adaptive management, and lesson learning.
Monitoring and evaluation is an integral part of the NAP implementation process intended to
improve efficacy and efficiency. M&E activities will be carried out according to existing UNDP
and GEF procedures, in collaboration with the UNDP Country Office and with the support of
UNDP-GEF. All such activities will be guided by the strategic objectives and performance
indicators spelt out in the strategy of the NAP.
The evaluation will capture the relevance of the NAP, appropriateness and quality, efficiency
and effectiveness of implementation and management, the level of stakeholder participation and
the potential for sustainability. It will assess the progress made towards the production of the
intended outputs and the achievement of the desired results; the potential for scaling up; and
specific emphasis on the extent to which the activities are carried out.
The flow of finance will be monitored. Each activity report shall be accompanied by a
corresponding financial statement, showing the amount of money spent and the activities
executed. The progress of implementation of the budget against proposed time schedules will be
29

--- Page 40 ---
measured as well as an analysis of any variance in budget execution against the planned
schedules. The work plan and budget will be reviewed periodically by the National Coordinating
Committee (NCC) and a project specific Steering Committee.
In order to ensure that the M&E process is efficiently and effectively carried out it is essential that
a baseline survey or baseline data should be collected. It is against this baseline data that the
progress or achievement of the program activities will be measured against. On obtaining this
baseline data, Objectively Verifiable Indicators (OVI) will be drawn to be used by the monitoring
team. It is therefore pertinent that the baseline data collection is one of the activities to be carried
out during the inception phase.
CONCLUSION
The National Action Program for the implementation of the Sustainable Land Management
in Liberia has two important aspects (i) It is an inward looking program that encourages
every person in the country to contribute towards SLM in the best and possible way that they
can. (ii) It is a people-centred approach which focuses on what the human being wants from
the environment first and then stresses on how he/she can get that with the minimal negative
impacts on the environment. It is encouraging the people to utilize the land and its resources
in such a way, those future generations who will come after them will be able to have similar
benefits like this present generation is having.
30

--- Page 41 ---
PART 2 - NATIONAL ANALYSIS
1. COUNTRY CONTEXT
This section provides a detailed analysis of the national issues that influence and /or are
influenced by SLM. It elaborates on how the factors influence or are influenced by the land
degradation and on how heavily dependent they are on natural resources. A good
understanding of this section will lead the program to address the causes adequately.
1.1 SOCIO-ECONOMIC CONDITIONS INFLUENCING LAND DEGRADATION
Liberia is a country situated on the West African Coast between longitude 7030' and 11030' west
and latitude 4018’ and 8030' north. Liberia covers a surface area of about 111,370 km2 (43,506
square miles) of which 96,160sq.km (37,570 sq. miles) is dry land, constituting 86.34% of the
total area. The balance is rivers, lakes and swamps. It shares a border with Sierra Leone to the
west, Guinea to the north, Côte d’Ivoire to the east and the Atlantic Ocean to the south. The
country is divided into 15 political sub-divisions, referred to as counties.
Figure 1: Political Boundaries map
31

--- Page 42 ---
Source: Field Survey, 2010
The counties are subdivided into districts. Each county and district is headed by County
Superintendents and District Superintendents. The districts are divided into Chiefdoms and
further into Clans and Towns. The chiefdoms are headed by paramount chiefs while the clans
and towns are headed by chiefs.
The population of Liberia was 3,476,608 as per census of March, 2008 (LISGIS, 2008), while
the official population projection puts it at 3,238,000 and the household survey derived from
geographic mapping puts the population at 3,511,618.The UNDP’s HDR 2007/2008 gives an
estimated population of 3,442,000, hence with a population growth of 2.7% currently there could
be a population of around 3 666 879. Given that the population in 1984 was 2,101,628, there has
been a rise of 1,374,980 people, an increase trend that has been observed since 1962.
32

--- Page 43 ---
Table 1. Population, Surface Area and Density (1984 and 2008)
Table XY: Population, Surface Area and Density (1984 and 2008)
COUNTY POPULATION AREA DENSITY
PERCENT PERCENT (SQ. M)
1984* 2008 1984* 2008 1984* 2008
Bomi 66,420 84,119 3.1 2.4 750 89 112
Bong 255,813 333,481 12.2 9.6 3387 76 98
Gbarpolu 48,399 83,388 2.3 2.4 3741 13 22
Grand Bassa 159,648 221,693 7.6 5.4 3064 52 72
Grand Cape Mount 79,322 127,076 3.8 3.7 1993 40 64
Grand Gedeh 63,028 125,258 3.0 3.6 4048 16 31
Grand Kru 62,791 57,913 3.0 1.7 1504 42 39
Lofa 199,242 276,863 9.5 8 3854 52 72
Margibi 151,792 209,923 7.2 6 1010 150 208
Maryland 69,267 135,938 3.3 3.9 887 78 153
Montsserado 491,078 1,118,241 23.3 32.2 737 666 1,517
Nimba 313,050 462,026 14.9 13.3 4460 70 104
Rivercess 37,849 71,509 1.8 2.1 2160 18 33
Rivergee 39,782 66,789 1.9 1.9 1974 20 34
Sinoe 64,147 102,391 3.1 2.9 3914 16 26
NATIONAL TOTAL 2,101,628 3,476,608 100.0 100.0 37482 56 93
Source: LIGIS, 2008
*The populations used were those that were derived for the respective counties after accounting
for boundary changes between1984 and 2008
Although the table above shows relatively high densities for certain counties, it has to be borne
in mind that these are presumably spreading the population for that county over the area when in
reality there are much higher densities in urban areas within the county and lower densities in the
rural areas. This is highly magnified in Montsserado County because of Monrovia city.
Therefore when we look at the farming and forest activities we would be looking at much lower
population densities than those portrayed above.
Liberia has a free enterprise economy, and is largely dependent on extractive industries primarily
rubber, timber, gold, diamond and agricultural crops. The country is currently considered a low-
33

--- Page 44 ---
income nation. By mid 2004, Liberia’s GDP stood at 207million USD with an inflation of
between 14 to 15% (NHDR 2006). It has a per capita income of USD199.30 which is far below
the poverty line estimated at approximately US$ 360.00. About 41% of the population has access
to health services and life expectancy at birth is only 47.7 years. The adult literacy rate is
estimated at 37%. Over two-thirds (76.2%) of the Liberian people are living below the
international poverty level of less than US$ 1.00 per day.
After decades of economic mismanagement and 14 years of intermittent civil conflicts, Liberia
has successfully transitioned to peace and sustainable development since 2003. A democratic
government was inaugurated in January 2006. The economy is expanding rapidly, with growth
accelerating to over 9 percent in 2007. The Government is introducing a broad set of policies to
foster peace, accelerate reconstruction and development, and build strong systems of governance.
Liberia has launched its recovery and is poised for rapid, inclusive, and sustainable development
in the years to come.
Liberia’s Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS) 2008-2011states that, the overall vision and major
strategies is to move towards rapid, equitable, and inclusive growth and development during this
period. This period is of critical importance as Liberia transitions from post-conflict stabilization
to sustained and shared growth, poverty reduction, and progresses towards achieving the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). The PRS builds on the Government’s “First 150-
Day Action Plan” and its interim PRS (iPRS), and has been formulated through broad-based
consultation with Liberian citizenry in cities, towns, and villages throughout the country,
members of the business community, civil society groups, the legislature, and international
partner organizations. The Government sees this three-year PRS not as an end in itself, but as a
step in a process towards long-term development that will continue long beyond 2011, when it
will develop the next phase of its PRS.
About 70% of the population lives in the rural areas and depend on the products and services of
agriculture, forestry and other extractive activities for their livelihood. Their traditions and
culture are built around the use of the resources found in their immediate environment. The
commercialization and utilization of food plant species, medicinal plants and other Non-Timber
34

--- Page 45 ---
Forest Products (NTFPs) are a source of income and services to both rural and urban
communities, and aggregate into the national economy.
Since the people are by enlarge rural, and especially the poor are critically dependent on the
natural resources for their livelihoods i.e. fertile soil for their food, clean water and health and for
general wellbeing. This reliance of natural resources creates complex, dynamic interactions
between environmental protection, the people’s access to and control over the natural resources,
and poverty. In addition to being heavily dependant on the environment they are also vulnerable
to environmental hazards, the poor are usually heavily affected by an environmental disaster,
economically as well as socially. They lack the technological knowhow and policy and
regulations to derive full benefits from their environment. It is therefore necessary to apply the
interventions that will address all the factors that are likely to cause environmental degradation.
These factors include abusive exploitation of natural resources, loss of biological diversity, soil
degradation, pollution, especially of water bodies by dumping of toxic chemicals, insufficient
enforcement mechanisms, inadequate waste management, etc.
1.2 BIOPHYSICAL CONDITIONS (as they affect and impact on SLM)
Climatic
Liberia falls within the West African Monsoon Climate, which alternates between wet and dry
periods, with intermittent rains and dry spells. The seasons do not necessarily depend on
changing temperature but are determined by the prevailing moisture-laden monsoon winds that
come from the southeast, which on hitting the Liberian coast rises, and then condenses into
heavy precipitation. During the months of November-March, the dust-laden Harmattan wind
originating from the Sahara desert blowing in from the northwest resulting in chilly dry climate.
The annual rainfall is approximately 1700mm in the dry North and in excess of 4500mm in the
wet south. The rain falls mainly from June to October when 80-95 % of the annual total is
recorded. Although data are scarce, evapo-transpiration is estimated at between 3mm and 4.5mm
per day during the wet season, and it is generally accepted that most days have a water surplus
for the 5-8 months each year, with November to February being particularly dry months.
35

--- Page 46 ---
Consequently this rainfall pattern, period of fall and the reliability of the rains will have large
implications on what the environment is capable of holding/producing. This is shown in figure 2.
The southern parts of Liberia, closest to the equator, receive rainfall throughout the year. The
seasonal rainfall in this region is associated with the Inter-Tropical Converging Zone (ITCZ),
and also to variations in timing and intensity of the West African Monsoon. The most well
documented cause of these variations is the El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO) which is
associated with drier conditions in West Africa. Temperatures in Liberia are generally higher on
the coast than inland. Temperatures range from 24to 27°C in the dry season and 24 to 25°C in
the wet season.
Figure 2: Rainfall Map of Liberia
36

--- Page 47 ---
Source: Liberia Hydrological Service, 2009
Consistent with the equatorial climate, the sun is almost over head at noon throughout the year,
insolation is very intense in all parts of the country. Therefore, high temperatures with very little
monthly variations occur. However, it varies from 280Cto 330C during the day and 240Cto 270C
at night. This can be seen in the isohyets map in figure 3.
Figure 3: Temperature Map of Liberia
37

--- Page 48 ---
Source: Liberia Hydrological Service, 2009
There is very little evidence of climate change since only a 0.8°C temperature increase has been
recorded between 1960 and 2006. Available data, however, suggest that the annual average
number of “hot” nights per year in Liberia has increased by 57days (15.7 %) between 1960 and
2003. There are no officially observed increases in hot day mean temperatures, nor significant
increase in the frequency of hot days.
38

--- Page 49 ---
Geophysical
There are four agro-ecological zones in Liberia with each zone having its own distinct physical
features and height above sealevel.
(1) The Coastal Plains stretch the whole 350miles (560 km) coastline of an almost unbroken
sand strip ranging from 0 to 30 meters above sea level. It is characterized by a relatively straight
coastline with sand bars and long beaches (with a near unbroken sand strip), salt and fresh water
lagoons and a few promontories like Cape Mount, Cape Mesurado and Cape Palmas. These
promontories and beaches together with Lake Piso and Lake Shepherd are points of high
attraction and could play an important role in the future of tourism in the country.
(2) Belt of inundated plateaux is followed by the belt of high landsand rolling hills in the north
and northwest. The highest elevation is the northern highlands, which includes Mount Wutivi
(1350 meters), the maximum elevation in Liberia.
(3) The Belt of Rolling Hills runs parallel to the coastal zone and has elevations rising to
90metres. There are numerous hills, valleys and watercourses in this zone which is covered with
forest around Grand Cape Mount County and in the eastern part of the country. Most of the
private agricultural concessions are located in this belt where both agriculture and forestry are
favored by the prevailing topographical and climatic conditions.
(4) The Plateau and Mountain Ranges behind the rolling hills reach heights of up to 300m while
the mountain ranges reach up to 600m. Important ranges are the Mano River Mountain, the Bea,
Bong, Gibi, Kpo, Putu and Tienpo ranges. The widest part of this zone is about 130km between
the Lofa and St. Paul Rivers. Within this area, farming dominates, hence it presents the different
forms and causes for biodiversity loss. Logging is slightly hindered by relief in the eastern part
of the country. Exploitation of the forest is more difficult in central and Upper Lofa County, due
to topographic conditions.
The Northern Highland Zone is situated in Upper Lofa and Nimba Counties and comprises
Wologisi range with a height of 1,350m and Nimba range with an elevation of 1,385 meters on
the Liberian side, as the mountain is shared by Cote d'Ivoire, Guinea and Liberia.
39

--- Page 50 ---
Soil types
Generally, there are three types of soil types in Liberia, i.e. the Lateritic soils or latosols, Sand
soils or regosols and Swamp soils. The Lateritic soils cover about 75% of the country. These are
reddish-brown in color and quite hard on the surface due to the laterisation process.
The latosols have been classified into seven series/types, named after places of occurrence, such
as Kakata, Suakoko and Voinjama. They are very acidic and lacking in most nutrients like
phosphates and nitrogen. Thus continuous farming requires the constant use of fertilizers.
However, the Latosols are more productive for agriculture purposes than the other 2 types of
soils in the country. Normally, latosols are not very well suited for agriculture due to their low
humus contents on one hand and low pH on the other hand but they provide valuable materials
for road construction.
Sandy soils or regosols consist of more than 60% coarse and fine sand and contain a small
amount of clay. The white to gray color of the sandy soils predominates the coastal plain up to
about 16km from the sea and they contain little humus and mineral nutrients. They are porous
and also do not retain moisture, hence they are not fertile for agriculture production but are only
suitable for pastures, oil and coconut palms.
Table 2: Soils of Liberia (Summary)
Soil Type Liberian Classification % Area Area (ha) Properties
Lateritic soils Kakata, Suakoko and 75% 8,352,750 Reddish brown, leached
or latosols Voijama Series 10cm topsoil, 4-6% OM,
acidic, well drained
productive agricultural
soils
Regosols or Clara Town, Sinkor and 20% 2,227,400 Well-drained, 60% coarse
coastal soils Freeport series sand, very low water
holding capacity, little
humus and few mineral
nutrients, not productive
40

--- Page 51 ---
agricultural soil
Alluvial soils Gbelle, Ballam, Grayzohn 5% 556,850 Waterlogged, grey
or swamp soils and Cuttington series hydromorphic soils,
poorly draining, thick dark
layer of loamy-peaty
organize material with
relative high humus
content
Source: CAADP, 2009
Swamp soils are found along the coast and in the interior; they account for about 4% of all soils.
The most frequent are the water logged gray hydromorphic soils in the floors of the valley,
which are flooded in the rainy season. Swamp soils also include a so-called half-bog soil. These
occur in swampy areas where drainage is poor and the level of water in the upper layer of the soil
is high. Consequently, the decay of plant materials is slow, and a thick dark layer of loamy-peaty
organic materials develops which has high humus content. This type of soil, when properly
drained, provides good condition for the cultivation of swamp rice, similar crops and tree crops
like mangoes. These soils consist of a series of layers of decaying plant materials, salt, mud,
grave land peat and they could be adapted to large-scale paddy rice production. In general,
Liberian soils are characterized by a shallow layer of humus, a low humus content and high
acidity as a result of the lack of magnesium and calcium.
Mountain ranges
Up to eleven mountains ranges have been identified in Liberia. They are Nimba mountain,
Wologisi mountain, Bong range, Gibi mountain, Putu mountain, Bomi mountain, Wutivi
mountain, Mano mountain, Bea mountain, Kpo range, and Wenegissi mountain, These mountain
ranges are known to possess mineral resources. Four of these mountains have been exploited for
iron ore i.e. Bong Range, Mount Nimba, Mano Mountain and Bomi Mountain. The Mountain
Ecosystems contain outstanding resources, both biological and nonbiological. There exist
valuable plants and animal species, which are representatives of biodiversity species found in the
tropical rainforest regions of the world. The fauna species include mammals, reptiles,
41

--- Page 52 ---
amphibians, birds, and insects. The flora species include highvascular plants of the deciduous,
semi-deciduous and savanna woodland species, riverine plant species, shrubs and herbs. From
about 60 years ago, both indigenous plants and animals which were in abundance had their status
begin to change for the worst in mountain communities when mining, shifting agriculture,
commercial logging and uncontrolled bush-burning activities. Several valuable non-biological
resources are also found in mountain ranges, including iron ore, diamonds and gold.
Wetlands
Kromah (2002) identified eight (8) wetlands in Liberia; five of which are now designated as
Ramsar Sites. These are Lakes Piso, Marshall, Mesurado, Gbedin, and Kpatawee. Mangroves
ecosystem characterize the wetlands in Liberia and cover a small area along the coast, from Cape
Mesurado to Cape Palmas, at the edges of lagoons, riverbanks, and river estuaries and in
widespread areas of swamps. According to Gatter (1988), mangroves cover 0.5% of the land
surface of Liberia. This is a fragile ecosystem which is vulnerable to invasion by humans.
Thirteen and a half 13.5% of the nation’s total area is covered with water. There are six (6) major
rivers. These are Cavalla, St. John, Mano, Lofa, Cestos and St. Paul but their potential for
complete navigability is yet to be fully explored. However, most of the rivers are navigable up to
20 miles from the coast, except for Cavalla, which is navigable up to 50 miles. The ecosystem
has great potential for fishing, but the potential is yet to be fully developed. These waters contain
plant species (mangroves, raphia palm, etc.) and animal species (fish, crabs, shrimps, water snail,
etc.), which are harvested and used by local dwellers and artisanal fisherman for both food and
commerce.
Biological
Voorhoeve (1979) distinguished two forest types: the evergreen forest and the moist semi-
deciduous forest. According to him, very little true deciduous forest exists in Liberia and the
deciduous forest found is actually a transitional forest between the evergreen and the semi-
deciduous forest. Liberia’s forest ecosystem can today be divided into four classes: primary
dense forest, climax secondary forest, secondary forest, which has not reached climax, and other
42

--- Page 53 ---
type mixed vegetation. This forest ecosystem is one of the 25- biodiversity hotspots identified
globally by Conservation International (CI).
The Forest Estate of Liberia is made up of natural (indigenous) and plantation/artificial forests.
According to FDA (1999) the natural forest covers approximately 4.8 million hectares
(12,167,900 acres) which amounts to 50% of the total land area of 96,180 km2. The
artificial/plantation forest covers roughly 10,158 hectares (25,000 acres) of reforested land. FAO
report of 2007, describes the Liberian biodiversity as follows: Liberia is home to 881amphibian,
birds, mammals, reptiles species of which 0.8% are endemic and 4.2% are threatened. It is also
home to over 2200 species of vascular plants of which 4.7% are endemic, adopted from World
Conservation Monitoring Centre Report. Currently only 1.3% Liberia’s land resources is
protected under IUCN (categories I –V)
There are two protected areas in the country, the Sapo National Park and the East Nimba Nature
Reserve. The two areas are among seven areas “bright spots” recommended for strict nature
conservation in a joint Government of Liberia/IUCN/WWF survey carried out from 1978 to
1979.
Sapo National Park encompasses 180,363 ha of lowland rainforest, including swampy areas,
drylands and riparian forests, and represents one of-if not the most - intact forest ecosystem in
Liberia. Notable fauna within the park include forest elephant (LoxodontaAfricana cyclotis),
Jentink’s (Cephalophusjentinki) and Zebra duikers (C. zebra) and large primate populations,
including the Diana monkey (Cercopithecusdiana), red colobus (Procolobusbadius), black and
white Colobus (Colobuspolycomos) and the western chimpanzee (Pan troglodytes verus). Also
found within the park are several populations of the endangered pygmy hippopotamus
(Hexaprotodonliberiensis), signifying a climax state of the ecosystem.
The East Nimba Nature Reserve is dominated by a semi-montane and deciduous forest and it
is one of the 14 centers of plant endemism within the Upper Guinea Hotspot. The Mount Nimba
Massif is located within the Sanokole quadrangle and is found on the north eastern border of
Liberia. Due to the mountainous effect/high altitude, the area has mild temperatures during most
43

--- Page 54 ---
of the year than the rest of the country. The hills and mountain ranges with their special
vegetation are the favorite migration and winter destination sites for palearctic migrants such as
European pied flycatcher, (Ficedulahypoleuca), spotted flycatcher, (Muscicapastritata), Garden
warbler and rock thrushes monticola found in rocky areas. It is believed that the Nimba Range
does not have the full height to develop a true montane rainforest. The Nimba slope between 500
and 700 meters contains a large number of plant species, representing not fewer than 82 genera
of trees and brushes. Piptadeniastrum, Heritiera, and Lophira are common. Between 700 and
900 meters Parinari becomes increasingly common, as well as Parkia and associated species.
There is an ecological boundary at about 850meters above which a dense layer of clouds usually
covers the slope and ridges except during the dry months. Nimba is an important bird area and a
designated world heritage site.
The Aquatic Systems are characterized by Freshwater and Coastal and Marine habitats. There are
about 166 species of freshwater fish in Liberia, and of this number, one species,
Barbustrispiloides is endemic, and another species, Oreochromis macrochir was introduced. The
remaining 164 are native. Average Annual Capture (Aquaculture Production) is 22 metric tons.
The 560km coastline has a continental shelf of 14,894 sq. km, and Territorial sea of up to
159,200 sq. km, it produces annually 7,616 metric tons of fish and 126 metric tons of marine
invertebrates, including Mollusks and Crustaceans. The Marine/Brackish water fish species are
all native species. Fishing industry for both freshwater and marine employed 5,143 people
annually between 1995 and 1998 and the number of docked fishing vessels recorded was 14. It
should be noted that five of the seven turtle species worldwide are found in Liberia. They are
Dermochelyscoriacea, Cheloniamydas, Lepidochelysolivacea, Eretmochelys imbricate and
Carettacaretta. The Cheloniamydas and the Dermochelyscoriacea species are endangered.
The aquatic ecosystem i.e freshwater as well as coastal wetlands and near-shore marine
communities are clearly affected by upstream changes in terrestrial environments as well as
contamination due to liquid and solid waste disposal into the water system especially within the
vicinity of urban areas. This happened mostly during the civil war years.
44

--- Page 55 ---
2. ANALYSIS OF THE CAUSES OF LAND DEGRADATION
2.1 NATURAL CAUSES OF LAND DEGRADATION
The major natural hazards and environmental conditions which act as predisposing factors for
land degradation can be classified into two, i.e. climatic factors and biophysical predispositions.
The current major climate hazards consist of rainfall intensities since Liberia receives upto
4770mm that falls in intensity storms over a seven months period giving a high potential for soil
erosion. This also causes a high potential for extreme coastal flooding especially where
vegetation is scant or has been removed. The high temperatures during the day results in the
formation of lateritic concretions which combine with some algae growth forming a hard soil
cap, which is impervious to water infiltration. This soil cap encourages runoff which then results
in surface erosion and eventually into gully erosion. In the north of the country where there are
periodic droughts, the soil tends to dry up in areas where there is very little or no vegetation at
all. As animals move on these dry brittle soils, they break the surface, making it vulnerable to
wind erosion as well as the first rains which then carry away the pulverized loose top soil.
The biophysical attributes that predisposes the Liberian landscape and vegetation are as follows:
• The regosols are loose sandy soils that are easily washed away especially in the sloppy
areas along the coast where they are found.
• Secondly the infiltrations of the regosols is very high, allowing all the fertilizers from
cropped areas in this soil type to seep through into the river systems resulting in polluted
ponds therefore negatively affecting the aquatic life especially with nitrates.
Both the regosols and latosols are susceptible to water erosion, with the regosols being easily
carried away due to the fact that they are loose and the latosols due to laterisation and soil
capping which reduces infiltration resulting in rill and gully erosion. Since the latosols are found
on the hill slopes of all the mountain ranges, the erodibility of these areas become very high in
areas where vegetation has been removed. The removal of forest cover and overgrazing of
rangelands exposes the land to soil degradation under the heavy rainfall regime of Liberia. Due
to the high acidity, these soils are predisposed to leaching under these humid climatic conditions
resulting in low fertility which reduces the productivity of the land. This then forces the farmers
to continuously cut down new areas after cropping the old areas for just four or five years. In
turn this continually puts pressure on the forests.
45

--- Page 56 ---
Another form of land degradation that is common in Liberia is the land pollution due to the solid
and liquid waste disposal into the rivers and the lagoons and the coast. This has been prevalent
due the conflict years when the waste collection system in the urban areas broke down and the
sewage systems broke down due to lack of maintenance. This resulted in polluted rivers, swamps
and beaches, resulting in the destruction of the breeding habitats for fish, oysters etc. The
polluted waterways compromised the food security for the people and their entire livelihood as
disease outbreaks became common.
2.2 ANTHROPOGENIC CAUSES OF LAND DEGRADATION
The anthropogenic causes of land degradation in Liberia can be grouped into the following classes:
policy and legal aspects, improper landuse and land use planning, knowledge gaps, flows in
technological implementation, food insecuruity. As we try to look at the impact of the humans on
the land degradation, it is important to note that at the centre of any environment management or
sustainable land management is the human being. Understanding the human being and his ways
and his needs, and learning his ways and technologies that have brought him this far will lead to
success in sustainable land management. And ignoring the human being and all the facts above will
limit success.
Policy related causes: For the land to be utilized properly and conserved, the land policies should
be clear and positive to allow the land user to use it profitably and look after it. The land tenure has
to be clear to make the people feel secure on the land and the right of use and ownership should be
coupled with responsibility to leave the land in a good state for future generations. The laws on the
use of the land should be encouraging and allowing the user to protect it.
Land use and planning: In order to reduce the susceptibility of the land to degradation, the land
will have to be used according to what it is classified to be used for. The land should be planned
properly and all mitigation measures to be put in place.
Knowledge gaps: The land users should be capacitated to use the land properly, their awareness
should be increased and they should be supervised or monitored on proper use to achieve
sustainable land management.
46

--- Page 57 ---
Technology and financial gaps: The technologies applied to the land should be appropriate to the
people and their requirements and the financial support adequate to allow the people to attain food
security.
The human being and food security: First and foremost, the human being has to attain food
security before he can think about proper land management. The local administration has to be
conducive to produce food and protect the land. Since the human being is at the centre of the
equation he/she has to be made to feel obliged or to feel that it is his duty to protect the land rather
than for him/her to feel that land protection is an added burden on him and his resources.
Therefore the direct human related causes of land degradation in Liberia are (1) unsustainable
slash-and-burn agriculture on the uplands; (2) deforestation for timber construction and
fuelwood. (3) unsustainable use of forest resources; (4) unsustainable extraction of resources like
minerals, timber, (5) land degradation caused by agricultural operations eg irrigation (6) land
degradation caused by waste disposal or pollution.
Unsustainable slash-and-burn agriculture is one of the largest direct causes of land
degradation in Liberia. Not only is there serious degradation of the agricultural lands themselves,
but unsustainable agriculture is one of the main causes of deforestation in Liberia. Deforestation
is driven by a combination of population growth and the lack of food security under rain fed
conditions pepetuating slash-and-burn farming. In the past, population pressures were low and so
was the slash-and-burn, resulting in very long fallow periods, which made the system
sustainable. However, with today’s higher population densities resulting in increases in land
pressures, the soil fertility and productivity of slash-and-burn system is undergoing a continuous
decline. Hence the food security is threatened. This system was sustainable also because the then
land policy allowed the farmer to have control over the area of his slash-and –burn, but recently
encroachments into the each other’s territories discourages the farmers to properly manage the
system. (Lowland agriculture is a more sustainable and Liberia has huge areas of lowlands that
could be developed for this type of agriculture. However, there are many barriers to lowland
agricultural development). If not monitored and controlled the slash-and-burn system could
easily deforestation Liberia followed by continuing declines in agricultural productivity and an
increase in food insecurity.
47

--- Page 58 ---
Of the 600,000 ha of lowlands, only 10,000 ha have been developed and half of that area has
been abandoned because the people are not accustomed to lowland farming. It also has to be
noted here that there is a potential of sustainably managing the land under slash-and burn with
the introduction of Agroforestry practices which uses fast growing leguminous tree species.
These would restore the fertility levels within a short period hence restricting the opening of
lands to sustain the slash and burn.
Deforestation: About 70% of deforestation in Liberia is caused by clearing for agriculture –
nearly all of it for slash-and-burn. The other recognized causes of deforestation are tree cutting
for charcoal making, fuelwood in the vicinity of urban settlements, also tree cutting for
construction in the areas around the urban centres which has yaken a toll on the mangrove forests
in the swamps. Furthermore the deforestation in Liberia has taken place in the mining areas for
construction of low-cost houses and fuelwood for the same settlements. This is a scenario that
dominated the landscape in the peri-urban areas. Wild fires that are started by illegal farmers and
hunters and honey gatherers have led to a lot of deforestation, which indiscriminately destroy all
tree type shrubs and the under growth.
In effect, unsustainable agriculture and deforestation are, by-enlarge, one and the same problem.
Figure 4: Destructive Logging Practices: Unselective logging
48

--- Page 59 ---
Figure 5: Shifting cultivation
49

--- Page 60 ---
Figure 6: Destructive logging; damage to secondary growth and the soil
Unsustainable use and harvest of forest resources: Large scale, uncontrolled, mechanized
harvesting of tropical hardwoods from the humid forests took place during the recent period of
civil war and the first six years of the post-civil war period when the country was under the
leadership of Charles Taylor. The Oriental Timber Company (OTC) of Indonesia had an
uncontrolled access to the timber in Liberia and they even had their own armed guards that
restricted anybody’s access to the area. The guards controlled the ports in Monrovia and
Buchanan as well and therefore it will never be known how much timber was extracted during
that time. It can only be summed with these few words from a visiting UN staff who managed to
take a quick detour of the road to the loading area in the middle of the forest “I have never seen
so much timber cut and piled up at one spot in my life” as they took a few snap shots of the
stockpiled timber. The harvesting was clear felling and dragging with heavy machinery which
left the land treeless and scared, a recipe for erosion of the top soil. This logging process was
unmonitored with no management at all and with only superficial replanting from their nusery
near the Sinoe river. In addition, this deforestation destroyed important habitat for species that
are threatened by extinction like the forest elephant, the pygmy hippopotamus, short-horned
50

--- Page 61 ---
buffaloes, a number monkey species and chimpanzees, some of which are endemic to the
Equatorial Guinea forest. There is currently a logging ban in place and such mechanized
harvesting has ended. The existing localized over-harvesting for wood fuels and other forest
products might not look like a major problem due to the small size of areas cleared but these
become the nucleus for the soil erosion process which continues as gullies under the forest cover.
However, with the lifting of the timber export ban in 2007, it was imperative for the government
to develop sustainable forest management strategies before uncontrolled harvesting began anew.
Land degradation caused by mining operations and other activities: Although the
deforestation and other associated land degradation has taken place due to a number of different
activities, it has always been down played due to its localized form. Mining activities have been
one of these e.g. the iron ore mining on the slopes of four mountain ranges in the interior reduced
the vegetation cover significantly. Due to the steep slopes, this was followed by heavy soil
erosion even after the operations had ended. During the recent civil war, the gold and diamond
panning on the river banks resulted in heavy siltation of rivers. Heavy metal poisoning which is
associated with gold mining also affected the downstream water of these rivers. Also the
establishment of camps for refugees and Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) resulted in
extensive deforestation due to the need for fuel, wood. This led to soil erosion in areas like
Grand Cape Mount, Lofa, Bomi and Gbarpolu counties.
51

--- Page 62 ---
Figure 7: Illicit Mineral Mining in Grand Cape Mount County
Source: Field Survey, 2010
A wide range of agrochemicals are known to percolate the soil and also contaminate the ground
water.
Civil and mechanical engineering activities have serious impacts on the land, and where there
is existence of inadequate environmental safeguards, the situation may be disastrous.
Inappropriate disposal or use of gas and oil thereby causing a flare over the land surface can
destroy the integrity of the land causing widespread soil fertility problems.
Community Rights at the Centre: To substantiate this statement, the pictures below save to
illustrate this fact. The diamond mining led to civil war in Liberia and the neighbouring Sierra
Leone and this led to refuges and IDPs. The establishment of the refugee/ IDPs camps led to land
degradation in the form of deforestation and soil erosion. On the other hand, the diamond mining
directly caused land degradation i.e. deforestation, soil erosion and siltation which then led to
Environmental IDPs which then led to land degradation.
52

--- Page 63 ---
Figure 8: Deforestation due to refugee / IDP camps
Figure 9: Soil erosion in Refugee / IDPs camp
53

--- Page 64 ---
Diamond mining Civil War IDPs Land degradation
Land degradation Environmental IDPs
2.3 THE EXTENT OF LAND DEGRADATION, GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION
AND COMMUNITIES UNDER THREAT
Due to the civil war, most of the evidence of land degradation is only qualitative and very few
quantitative studies if any were carried out. Evidence presented here is only in the form of
qualitative statements and pictures hence it might be difficult to use this as baseline data for
monitoring during the implementation of the sustainable land management programme. It is
currently estimated that only 5 – 7% of Liberia’s landmass is affected by desertification, as such
the impacts of drought and desertification are still minimal. However, the increase in commercial
logging, increased arbitrary felling of trees for wood fuel, charcoal production, slash-and-burn
agriculture, timber for construction, expanding industries, increase in artisanal mining and artisanal
fishing coupled with the creeping northern savannah and the extending derived and coastal
savannahs are giving reasons for serious concerns.
The first extensive forest inventory was undertaken in 1965. About two decades later, in 1985, a
forest resources survey funded by FAO and FDA was carried out and it put the forest cover of
Liberia at about 49.8% of the total land area i.e. 4 329 000ha. The annual deforestation rate was
then estimated at about 0.5%. i.e. 21 6450 ha of forest lost per year. By 1998 annual
deforestation had risen to an estimated 1%, i.e. 43 290 ha of forest lost per year, while recent
estimates by World Resources Institute (WRI) put the rate at about 2%, i.e. 86 580 ha lost per
year.
Another source, FAO has put the rate of deforestation for the period between 1990 and 2010 at
0.61% which is 26 407 ha a year giving a total for the 20 year period of 528 138 ha lost. The
same report puts the woodfuel removal rate at 3843 metric tones in 1990 and that by 2005 it had
54

--- Page 65 ---
almost doubled at a figure of 6678 metric tones a year. This increase is partially attributed to the
breakdown of the hydroelectric generation station during the civil war which resulted in more
than 80% of the population resorting to wood fuel for their energy requirements for cooking
throughout the country.
What has been noted here is that the rate at which the forest cover is removed heavily out-strips
the rate at which it being replaced. Although in excess of 480,000 acres (192,000 hectares) of
forestland is lost annually due to logging, shifting cultivation and other activities, the
government has only replanted less than 27,000 acres (10,927 hectares) since the inception of its
reforestation program in 1971. This is a mare mockery in mathematical terms.
Figure 10: Map showing land-use patterns in Liberia in 2004
Forest Management Practices
55

--- Page 66 ---
Before 1960s, Liberia experienced insignificant forest depletion problems for several reasons the
main ones being: the low human population density in forest areas, undeveloped interior part of
the country which included limited access roads, limited information on the forest resources and
low demand for timber products. The forest sector began to attract investors after 1968 when the
German Forestry Mission to Liberia produced a twelve-volume comprehensive report on
Liberia’s forests. The report provided a wide range of information on the extent of the forests
and the amounts of timber in the country including information on the distribution of timber tree
species, the distribution and stocking of the forest, and statistics on the timber volume and wood
qualities. This set of documents attracted loggers into the country and since then the rates of
logging took an upward trend with corresponding increase in forest depletion. Until the forest
reform in the early 2000s, forestry was comprehended as logging operations, except in isolated
cases where reforestation was practiced in some areas. It was looked at as resource that could be
taped continuously with no management at all.
Forest Harvest Operations: As earlier mentioned, forestry in Liberia has been synonymous to
logging, since it was the only activity concerning forestry in the country, as a result the
harvesting methods were therefore considered to be major contributors to deforestation and
general land degradation. Although, during the pre-civil war Liberia Forest Policy mandated all
logging concessionaires to extract timber based on the concept of selective logging, the truth is
that clear logging or forest creaming was commonly practiced in most concessions. Selective
logging can be a sustainable forest management practice if the rules are adhered to. It reduces the
chances of degradation as opposed to forest creaming. The New National Forest Law of Liberia
(2006) stipulates two forest harvesting types: (i) Timber Sales Contract (TSC) which allows all
trees of commercial value to be harvested at the same time and (ii) Forest Management Contract
(FMC) which restricts harvesting to selective logging. To curtail land degradation currently, the
FDA is working on a code of harvest which emphases and enforces the following:
-residual plant species are not lost or destroyed to any significant level
-sustainable land management is ensured in logging concession areas.
-there is control over re-entry to logged forest blocks,
-there should conduct post-harvest treatment in logged forest blocks,
56

--- Page 67 ---
-preventive measures against encroachment on areas when loggers leave the site (e.g,
closure of logging roads and damaging of bridges on logging roads to prevent access to
forest by farmers, hunters and other forest users).
The code regulates that under the FMC the land is protected against other land uses like farming,
mining, power-chain sawing. The harvest code which is modeled on the ‘West African Code of
Harvest Practice’ is currently being practiced in countries like Cameroon and Ghana. It will
contain information on environmentally friendly ways of constructing logging roads,
constructing bridges, establishing landings, and building skidding roads to minimise damages to
the soil and residue plants. The code will have best practices in timber concessions as well as
financial and economic assessment of timber harvesting operations. Post-logging treatments will
be mandatory to ensure the rehabilitation of logged areas as well as restoration to allow tree
regeneration.
Post-logging treatments contained in the FDA Forest Management includes (among others) slope
management, soil replacement, vegetation replacement, and relief operations to rescue residual
trees and regenerations of important economic tree species. It recommends re-entry to
previously logged areas, only after assessment to determine the pros and cons, but in general
only 25years after felling. Monitoring will be introduced to ensure that all concession operation
guidelines are respected by loggers. The monitoring will also ensure that all access roads
constructed during logging are closed and bridges in concession areas removed before loggers
leave the site. This action is necessary to prevent encroachment by farmers, hunters and other
unauthorized forest users that would then open the area to abuse and certainly to degradation.
A Lesson learnt is that extending logging roads increased access of farmers and poachers to
forest concession areas by taking advantage to encroach on the forest and wildlife resources, thus
contributing to the acceleration of forest depletion, deforestation and biodiversity depletion. The
FDA 2009 Annual Report estimates deforestation in the late 1980s to have been 2% per annum,
and that with the unregulated logging during the 14 year civil war, it increased to about 3%. The
2004 National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan (NBSAP) draft Report on Liberia indicated
57

--- Page 68 ---
that approximately 50% of the nation’s forest cover had been lost due to logging, road
construction in logging areas and shifting cultivation.
Reforestation: The FDA implemented a National Reforestation Program (NRP) between 1971
and 1989 and the main objectives of that program being to:
(a) produce pulp wood for the external pulp industries
(b) rehabilitation of sites degraded or deforested as a result of human activities (mainly logging
and farming) or natural phenomena.
The reforestation program was implemented in Zaway (Grand Cape Mount County),
Tubmanburg (Bomi County), Yekepa and Kpaytuo (Nimba County), Cavalla in Garley Town
community (Grand Gedeh County, and Glaro (Maryland County). An afforestation nursery was
established in Foya District (See photo below) where the northern savanna is spreading rapidly.
Although this plantation was initiated to augment industrial wood production, it also served to
halt the rapidly spreading desertification, which takes over farmlands and other deforested lands.
Figure 11: Afforestation nursery
58

--- Page 69 ---
In addition to reforestation and afforestation, site rehabilitation through tree planting has been a
common practice in Liberia since the 1980s. It is now quite common in former refuge and IDPs
camps like Senje in Grand Cape Mount. This was carried out by FDA, Society for the
Conservation of Nature of Liberia (SCNL) Environmental Foundation for Africa (EFA) and
Farmers Associated to Conserve the Environment (FACE) in several locations in Montserrado,
Nimba and Grand Cape Mount Counties. The majority of the trees planted were fast growing
species like Acacia species. Tree planting for site rehabilitation only became popular in post war
Liberia.
Community Forestry
Due to the realization of the encroachment that took place in the protected areas during the civil
war, Fauna & Flora International (FFI) in collaboration with FDA are engaged in implementing a
project geared towards the conservation of biodiversity of the Sapo National Park (SNP). The
project, ‘Biodiversity Conservation Around Sapo National Park’ (BCASP), is integrating strictly
protected zones in a community and commercial production system. Funded by the Global
Environmental Facility (GEF) and the French Global Environment Facility (FFEM) for a period
of four years (August 2006 – July 2010), the project is also engaged in community livelihood
initiatives.
Community forestry programmes for the proposed Lake Piso Multiple Use Sustainable PA and
Wonegizi communities is in the pipeline. The initial project, ‘Liberia National Carbon Strategy:
a Capacity Building and Design of Community Forestry Pilot’ will be implemented at the first
site by FACE and at the second site by Skills and Agriculture Development Service (SADS),
both projects are in collaboration with Nature Conservation and Research Center (NCRC) based
in Ghana. This will be a community based initiative which will see the communities taking it on
themselves to protect an area within their areas.
Agricultural Practices
There are four major agriculture production systems noticeable in Liberia. These systems are (1)
state-owned plantations, (2) foreign commercial plantations, (3) domestically owned,
medium-sized commercial farms and (4) small household farms which have all contributed to
deforestation and land degradation. .
59

--- Page 70 ---
a. State-owned plantations: About 35,000 ha of cocoa and 40,000 ha of forest were opened up
and planted to coffee and cocoa by the Liberia Cocoa and Coffee Corporation (LCCC).
These State-owned plantations suffered great setback during the civil crisis period.
b. Foreign commercial plantations: Approximately 70,000 ha of forests were cut up and
planted with oil-palm and 150,000 ha to rubber plantations. These plantations are established
and sustainably managed until the start of the civil war. These are currently being
rehabilitated.
c. Domestically owned, medium-sized commercial farms produce cash crops and livestock.
The primary environmental impact from this domestic agricultural practice is deforestation,
which then leads into other forms of land degradation.
d. Small household farms are established throughout the country. The majority are mainly by
shifting agriculture system. Several hundred hectares of such farms with citrus, coconut, cola,
mangoes, plantain and pineapple exist. Rice farms top the list of household farms in the
country. Over the years, a lot of studies conducted in the country put traditional household
rice farms to the average of about 1.5 ha per household across Liberia. Root, tuber and
leguminous crops are also common in small household farms and backyard gardens. Where
these crops are planted, the farmland is fallowed after 4 to 5 years to restore soil fertility . At
this point, an equivalent piece of land is opened up in the forest. The farming rotation or
fallow period is based on tribal land tenure arrangements and often discourages long-term
investors in the agriculture sector. Shifting agriculture system has promoted deforestation,
especially when fallow period reduces in a particular community as farming populations
increase. In general, each family will own up to 4 or so plots at different stages of forest
growth.
Private Plantations
These also constitute large tracks of forest that were opened up to establish these plantations. A
few examples are Firestone Rubber Plantations in Margibi County, the Charles D. Sherman oil-
palm Plantation in Grand Cape Mount County, the Guthrie Rubber Plantation shed between
Bomi and Grand Cape Mount Counties, and the Weala Rubber Plantation in Margibi County.
Coconut plantations are commonly grown in the coastal belt communities. Except for Bomi
60

--- Page 71 ---
County in the northwest, rubber is mainly produced in central Liberia (Montserrado, Margibi,
Bong, Nimba, Maryland and Sinoe Counties) although small plantations can be found in the
other counties. Oil palm plantations are extensively established in Sinoe, Grand Gedeh and
Grand Cape Mount Counties. In most cases, rubber, oil-palm and coconut are established and
properly managed except during the civil war.
Mining
Iron ore mining companies were operating at four sites in the country before the war. They were:
the Liberia Mining Company (LMC) in Bomi County, the National Iron Ore Company (NIOC)
in Grand Cape Mount County, Liberian-American Mining Company (LAMCO) in Nimba
County, and Bong Mining Company (BMC) in Margibi County. Based on previous experiences,
mineral exploration and mining has been a serious challenge to sustainable land management in
Liberia in the following ways (a) deforestation of the area and its surroundings (b) sedimentation
and pollution of rivers (e.g. St. John River) and creeks sourcing from iron ore mining
communities that continue to suffer from past mining activities, (c) the land slide incidents as
the Norway Camp (NIOC0) on October 6, 1981 as a result of over clearing, poor planning or
lack of strategic plan to prevent risks (d) lack of land rehabilitation like the exploration tunnels
left in mountainous communities are still a danger to forest dwellers. The photo shows one of the
tunnels dug by LAMCO on the mountain top in Nimba County dating back to the 1980s (See
photo on left above of LAMCO tunnel on Kitoma Mountain in Nimba County).
61

--- Page 72 ---
Figure 12: LAMCO exploration tunnel (over 30 years)
A mineral map by the Ministry of Lands, Mines and Energy (MLME) depicts that the entire
country is covered with mineral deposits. It also indicates potential land-use conflict between the
mining sector and other major land-use sectors such as forest and agriculture as well as a high
potential for land degradation all over the county. In the post-civil-war period, a lot of mining
licenses have been awarded. A few of the sites to be exploited under these licenses are the (a)
Western Nimba deposit by Acelor Mittal, (b) Eastern Nimba deposit, (c) Wologizi East
mountains and (d) the Goe Fantro Range by BHP Billiton. Unlike the past, these two seem to be
very much concerned about the impacts of their operations on the natural environment. They
have conducted a series of environmental and social impact studies to establish baseline
information on their operational sites and to design environmental management plan (EMP),
with works handbooks and compliance documents. This set of documents will ensure that only
62

--- Page 73 ---
insignificant or minimum negative impacts of the mining activities to the environment (i.e. soil,
vegetation, hydrologic systems etc) mitigation and offset measures for any negative impacts
resulting from its operations are planned for. There are already facing soil erosion and pollution
challenges inherited from past iron ore operations.
Figure 13: Map showing mineral deposits all over the country
Apart from iron ore mining, diamond and gold mining activities are prevalent in most parts of
Liberia. Most of these activities are alluvial mining. For example, some alluvial mining pits were
recently observed in Gbarpolu and Grand Bassa (See picture below for one of the alluvial mining
sites in Grand Bassa County). Alluvial mining has become an environmental challenge to
63

--- Page 74 ---
Figure 14: Alluvial mining causing extreme environmental degradation
Protected Areas Management in Liberia. For example, the Sapo National Park has been invaded
by alluvial gold miners since 2003. About four major mining sites are illegally established inside
the park. They do not only dig up the land but cut the trees for construction and woodfuel as well
as poach the protected animal species in the park. The EPA reported in February 2009, that
Komblo International (KBI) had been involved in mineral exploration in the Proposed Lake Piso
64

--- Page 75 ---
a PA without the knowledge of the local communities and local authorities. About 68 exploration
pits were discovered dug by KBI between the towns of Gbesseh and Sawilor in Tewor District.
Other Land-Use Practices
Other harmful land-use practices in Liberia are (a) sand extraction (mining) along the beaches,
lakes, rivers and creeks, (b) garbage/ solid waste disposal or dumping into the lagoons and
mangrove swamps, (c) reclamation of wetlands for settlement establishments in forest
communities and mangrove swamps, and (d) rock quarrying in and around the urban areas where
quarry stone for building is required. These activities usually make the land more susceptible to
more degradation and pollute the swamps as well as destroying of special habitats.
Figure 15: Woodfuel causing deforestation
Wood saving cooking stoves Open-fire cooking
65

--- Page 76 ---
Figure 16: Stone quarrying for construction
2.4 LAND DEGRADATION TRENDS AND GEOGRAPHICAL TARGETING
Deducing from the foregoing discussions, it is evident that in general all forms of land degradation
are on the increase in Liberia with a significant increase from the 1960s to date. It has also been
highlighted that the period of the civil war from 1989 to 2002 saw another marked increase in the
rate of land degradation irregardless of the fact that economic activities were supposed to be
reduced, but the warlords in the various parts of the country exploited whatever natural resources
were found in their areas to support their war efforts. This is to illustrate by the graphic trends,
comparative photos of various activities for the period between 1960 and 2010. Of particular
interest will be to look at the biodiversity degradation of both fauna and flora.
The figure 17, below shows the receding forest over the whole country. This increase in the
cleared areas could be due to increase in shifting cultivation, refuge and IDPs camps clearing and
the increase in the rate of woodfuel and charcoal extraction, all of which have caused significant
increase in deforestation in recent years.
66

--- Page 77 ---
Figure 17: Trends of Deforestation: forest cover over 1180 years
Source: EPA, 2004
There is also encroachment into the protected areas like Sapo Nat Park and the East Nimba Nature
Reserve. This has also been a result to the increase in population over the years all over the whole
country according to FFI and CI documents.
The figure 18 shows the mangrove encroachment and mangrove reclaimed for settlement. This is
evidence of the increased pressure that has been exerted on the land and natural resources in and
around the cities.
67

--- Page 78 ---
Figure18: Mangroves clearing and solid waste dumping to reclaim land in Paynesville/Congo
Town
2.5 COSTS OF LAND DEGRADATION
The cost of land degradation is a difficult concept to assess, nevertheless it is necessary to establish
it so that it can be presented to the landusers and stakeholders in a simplified manner that would
make them appreciate that there is a cost attached to the degradation. The monetary value of the
land degradation could be measured indirectly through the cost of rehabilitation. Sometimes the
cost might look small but it is important to take into account the amount of time it takes to restore
the land to what it was before any human activity or planned project activity that resulted in the
land being degraded. One could look at the cost of reforestation i.e. time, staff costs (professional
and non-professional), cost of seedlings, tools, protection costs. Another way of looking at it would
be to look at the cost of loosing a habitat in terms of animals, plants, tourism, aesthetic value
assigned to it. This value can be assumed or adopted from the Ecosystems Services Values which
have been agreed globally shown in Table 3.
68

--- Page 79 ---
Ecosystems Services Value:
Although this system is been adopted, it has to be brought to the reader’s attention that valuing the
environment is a complex and potentially contentious process. MEA (2005) presents the Total
Economic Value (TEV) of an ecosystem as shown in table 3. Globally there are 17 ecosystems
that have been given economic values. It is a system based on Direct and Indirect Use Values
which try to include changes in productivity, cost based approaches and contingent valuations.
Table 3: Average Global Value of Annual Ecosystems Service
ECOSYSTEM Annual Local Value
(US$/ha/year , 1994 values)
Coastal 4 052
Open Ocean 252
Wetlands 14 785
Topical Forest 2 007
Lakes/ Rivers 8 498
Temperate/ Boreal forest 302
Grasslands 232
Cropland 92
Estuaries 22 832
Tidal/ mangrove 9 990
Swamps/floodplains 19 580
This methodology is further translated into Land Cover Classes. These are allocated nominal value
weightings that are allocated to each land cover class, as shown in table 4. The value decreases
with changes in land cover that could be hydrological or ecological. On the hydrological route, a
reduction in water supply for irrigation will reduce the household income, while on the ecosystems
functions route, loss of biodiversity would reduce human activity leading to reduced human well
being.
69

--- Page 80 ---
Table 4: Land Cover Class Environmental Value Weights
LAND COVER CLASS VALUE WEIGHT
Urban 1
Predominantly rura Agriculture Domain 8
Agriculture area with small forest presence 10
Mixed Agiculture and forest 33
Agriculture Degraded Forest 50
Open dense Forest 50
Closed dense forest 66
Free Water 281
Savanna or bare soil 8
Coastal Ecosystem complex 134
Wetlands 489
Agro – Industrial Plantation 28
A land cover map of Liberia based on this method can be seen in figure 10.
Another qualitative approach to looking at and understanding the cost of land degradation is as
follows:
-Past and current costs associated with land degradation have been documented to be low
agricultural production; poor nutrition; increase in prices of food and other commodities;
poor accessibility to food; decline in human health especially in rural communities; and
population displacement.
-It has been forecast that predicted climate change scenarios will exacerbate the already
appalling situation of food insecurity, poor human health, human settlement and
displacement. The climate change is also predicted to exacerbate the adverse impacts on the
physical environment which is: nutrient loss, soil erosion, sedimentation, siltation,
eutrophication, and pollution of water bodies, damage to roads, bridges and other
infrastructure and biodiversity loss and soil infertility.
70

--- Page 81 ---
3. COMMUNITY PRACTICES, PREVIOUS AND CURRENT PROGRAMMES, AND
LESSONS LEARNED
A) Shifting cultivation dominates the rural agriculture sector of the country. The Liberian
farmers are adapted to this traditional farming system that is sometimes referred to as
slash-and-burn farming. The system is labour intensive, low in productivity, land
extensive and lacks technologies. The system contributes significantly to deforestation
and biodiversity loss because it uses very large pieces of land. Until the population of
Liberia began to take a sharp upward trend about four decades ago, shifting cultivation
was not regarded as a major threat to forest conservation. This was because land fallow
periods of 12 - 15 years was long enough to permit natural restoration of forest up to old
secondary succession level. In many parts of the country, the land fallow period has
drastically reduced to 5 years.
Shifting cultivation appears to be more dominant in the belt of the dissected table-land and the
belt of the rolling hills, which are believed to account for about 90% of the arable land of the
country. The draft NBSAP Report (2004) confirms this. The report also indicated that at that
time, over 95% of Liberia’s farms were located on uplands, which are far less productive than
lowlands and contribute to environmental degradation. The FAO (2005) draft report mentions
that about 46% of the total land area i.e. 4 500 000ha of the country is arable and most farming is
carried out on small holdings. Many of these small holdings are cultivated in the traditional ways
of bush fallowing or shifting cultivation. The result is exposure of the soil which induces
reduction in soil fertility through surface erosion and leaching of essential soil nutrients.
Reduction in forest due to increased shifting cultivation also results in habitat destruction or loss,
and destruction of flora species.
The Lesson learnt about Shifting Cultivation: This is a system that allowed natural
re generation of the fertility through nutrient recycling and capture of leached nutrients by
deep roo ted plants like trees as opposed to annual crops. This understanding of the shifting
cultivation system can be mimicked by the agroforestry technology where fast growing tree
species can be introduced into fallow pieces of land and within 3 to 4 years it would have
regained the same amount of fertility it would have gained in 12 to 15 years of shifting
cultivation. The planting of trees reduces the natural succession time from about 14 years to
3 years in total.(bare ground to herbs/shrub to grasses to climax grasses to bushes to trees to
climax trees) =14years to about 3 years in total.
71

--- Page 82 ---
B) The lowland areas account for about 6.1% of the total land area of Liberia. Most of the
arable lowlands are scattered over the surface of the country and are often found in areas
difficult to access and to cultivate (e.g. narrow valleys). In the absence of appropriate
and applicable farming methods and skills, cultivation of these lowlands is difficult. Only
few communities in Liberia practice lowland cultivation probably because their lowlands
are situated in locations that are accessible or because arable uplands are limited. For
example, in Foyah District (Lofa County), where deforestation is severe, swamp-rice
farming is very common. This farming practice has also been observed intensily
populated peri/sub-urban communities such as Voinjama, Kolahun and Zorzor
The Lesson learnt from the three communities/tribes who formally use the lowlands: It is how
people manage the swamps to make a living from them. It can also be learnt that the alternative
crops can be grown better in the lowlands as a substitute or cash crop and that these cash crops
could be produced and sold to enable these lowland farmers to purchase enough food from their
proceeds . Alternatively what technologies do the people want that will make them grow swamp-
rice. Are agriculturalists/development workers really listening to the people or learning from
them and doing the value-addition that is required for them to use the fertile lowlands profitably
and stop cutting more forest to open new lands for cropping.)
4. ANALYSIS OF THE ENABLING ENVIRONMENT INFLUENCING SLM
4.1 POLICY FRAMEWORKS INFLUENCING SLM
The current national development policy agenda is spelt out in the “Lift Liberia Policy” or the
Liberia’s Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS) which presents the Government’s vision and major
strategies for moving towards rapid growth and development during the period 2008-11.
Policy Making Process
Once an institution or organization perceives that an important issue exists, it is discussed and the
possible policy responses considered capable of addressing the issue are formulated. The policy
options are screened, assessed or analyzed, and sent to Cabinet which comprises twenty (20)
ministries. The Cabinet deliberates and takes a final decision, after which it is passed over to the
National Legislature for enacting a law to its effect.
72

--- Page 83 ---
Liberia’s overarching aim is to build a new nation that is peaceful, secure, and prosperous, with
democratic and accountable governance based on the rule of law, and with abundant economic
opportunities for all Liberians. The Government’s central objectives over the next three years
are:
• to firmly establish a stable and secure environment across Liberia
• to be on an irreversible path towards sustainable, equitable and inclusive growth and
development
• to rebuild the capabilities of and provide new opportunities for Liberia’s greatest asset –
its people
• to established responsible institutions of justice, human rights, and governance.
Liberia aims to do away with the old divisions, marginalization, and exclusion of the past and
replace them with inclusiveness, equitable opportunities, and empowerment for all Liberians.
The country’s chosen route of achieving the above PRS is organized around a framework with
four basic Pillars:
• Expanding peace and security;
• Revitalizing the economy;
• Strengthening governance and the rule of law; and
• Rehabilitating infrastructure and delivering basic services.
Expanding Peace and Security
The Government has begun to rebuild the full range of its security forces and has made
substantial progress in reintegrating refugees and IDPs, with strong support from its international
partners. It has demobilized and reintegrated over 90,000 ex-combatants, 11,780 of whom were
children. This has been done through formal reintegration programs, and deactivated or retired
over 17,000 members of the Armed Forces of Liberia (AFL), the Liberian National Police
(LNP), and the Special Security Service (SSS). To date the government has recruited and trained
2,000 AFL and about 3,500 police officers and has upgraded the infrastructure for the police as
well as the Armed Forces of Liberia. Alongside its international partners, the Government has
provided support and temporary cash assistance to over 108,000 exiled refugees and 325,000
73

--- Page 84 ---
registered IDPs in addition to tens of thousands more who have returned to their communities
outside of formal programs. The Government is currently preparing itself to recieve large
numbers of refugees being repatriated from the West Africa sub-region.
(The peaceful and secure environment is essential for communities to start planning medium to longterm
programmes. This also ensures the establishment and implementation of the rule of law in the country
which will go hand in hand with SLM which is a medium to long term programme hence this environment
is essential for it to take place)
Revitalizing the Economy
The Government has taken a range of measures to overhaul its financial management systems
and to spur renewed economic activity. It moved quickly to introduce a cash-based balanced
budget and new expenditure control mechanisms, and strengthened enforcement and collection
of customs duties and other taxes. The Government endorsed and is implementing the
Governance and Economic Management Assistance Program (GEMAP), which provides
international experts to support several key financial agencies of the Government. It also
successfully implemented two IMF Staff-Monitored Programs, under which it made significant
improvements in public finances and in monetary and exchange rate polices, paving the way to
full restoration of normalized relations with the IMF in March 2008. It also joined the Extractive
Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) to strengthen accountability and transparency in
managing funds generated through natural resource-based activities. The Government submitted
legislation to formally merge the Bureau of the Budget with the Ministry of Finance, as well as
legislation to limit the discretion of the Government to change budget allocations between
ministries and agencies without approval of the Legislature to a cumulative total of 30 percent.
The latter was recently adopted by the legislature after reducing the threshold to twenty percent.
(The EITI as described above is a necessary step towards the attainment of SLM since the
Liberian economy is highly dependent on the Extractive industry like forestry and mining
industries that will allow SLM to flourish and benefit the current and future generations.)
To begin the revitalization of key economic activities, the new Government in early 2006
immediately cancelled all forestry contracts and reviewed 95 contracts and concessions granted
by the National Transitional Government of Liberia. The Government then subsequently passed
74

--- Page 85 ---
a Forest Reform Act to strengthen over-sight and regulation of the forestry sector. These steps
paved the way for the United Nations Security Council to lift the sanctions on Liberian timber
exports and should lead to a rapid recovery in the timber sector during the PRS period. (The
passing of the New Forestry Reform Act and the reviewing and cancellation of most of the
logging concessions led to the lifting of the UN sanctions. This then allowed the economy to
benefit from these activities and hence will be bound by international regulations to utilize these
resources in a sustainable manner, making way for mainstreaming SLM.)
The Government completed negotiations with ArcelorMittal and the Firestone Rubber Company
to revise major concession agreements to increase the benefits for the Liberian people and
concluded new agreements to re-start oil palm production. It distributed over 40,000 tools and 20
metric tons of seed rice to some 33,000 farmers throughout the country in 2006. Larger amounts
were distributed in 2007. It worked to increase employment throughout the country through
community development projects, food for work programs, road building programs, urban
cleanup projects, and the revitalization of agriculture. The Government has also made definite
initial progress in dealing with its debt situation. It formulated and began implementation of a
comprehensive domestic debt resolution strategy, cleared its long-standing arrears to the World
Bank, the African Development Bank, and the IMF. A new three-year agreement was signed
with the IMF, and also reached the Decision Point under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries’
(HIPC) Initiative.
(The revised rubber concessions have embedded in them the art of production with protection,
the aspect of ownership and benefits to the Liberian people which is a prerequisite to SLM.
Further the distribution of seed and fertilizer by GOL and NGOs was a measure which directly
encouraged farmers to use their old lands since the fertility could be improved, directly reducing
the opening of new farmlands. The introduced urban clean ups directly reduced the amounts of
solid waste going into the streams, swamps and the lagoons directly improving the water systems
and the breeding places for fish, crustaceans etc )
Strengthening Governance and the Rule of Law
The Government moved quickly to introduce a requirement that the President, all Cabinet
Ministers, and all commissioned officers publicly declare their assets, and submitted to the
75

--- Page 86 ---
Legislature a new Code of Conduct for all public officials. It developed and began to implement
a comprehensive anti-corruption strategy, which included the submission of legislation to
establish an Anti-Corruption Commission with prosecutorial powers. It also began the process of
civil service reform, and the settling of civil servants’ arrears for periods ranging between six to
eighteen months. On recognition that many of the governance problems of the past have their
roots in the excessive concentration of power in the Executive and in Monrovia and to that end, it
is strengthening the Legislature by giving it more power over budgetary issues. It has
established a Women’s Legislative Caucus with membership from both Upper and Lower
Houses and has began the process of decentralization, by establishing County Support Teams to
support County Superintendents and Assistant Superintendents. Also, a Children’s Assemblies
and a National Children’s Parliament were also established to ensure children’s participation in
governance issues. (The decentralization of power to the counties, districts and chiefdoms allows
the communities to have a say in what is happening in their areas. It comes with the
decentralization of the planning process and the budget which gives the local communities a
sense of ownership and a sense of belonging to the process and its products, which is a
prerequisite for SLM. Also the introduction of the Women’s Legislative Caucus and the
Children’s Assembly gives these two normally marginalized groups in society but who actually
till the land a say in what has to be done and an understanding of why things have got to be done
that way)
Rehabilitating Infrastructure and Delivering Basic Services
The Government initiated the rehabilitation of four major highways, many secondary roads, as
well as bridges, culverts, and drainage facilities in several areas around the country. Electricity
connections and pipe-borne water were restored to some parts of Monrovia for the first time in
15 years. The Government has rebuilt, equipped and reopened many schools throughout the
country, and it abolished tuition fees for public primary schools, and significantly reduced tuition
fees for public secondary schools, leading to a 44 percent increase in school enrolments. It
restored services to over 350 health facilities around the country, and rehabilitated more than 20
clinics and several hospitals and health centers. It immunized over 95 percent of children under
five against measles over a two year period, and trained over 3,500 health workers in malaria
case management. The Government also provided HIV and AIDS prevention services to the
76

--- Page 87 ---
general population, particularly to high risk groups, as well as treatment and care services to
people living with HIV and AIDS.(The re-establishment of electricity directly cuts down on the
woodfuel and charcoal requirement nationally especially in the urban areas. The repairs to
schools and the reduction in the tuition fees that saw a 44% increase in enrolment, this ensures
that the country will have an educated youth who will easily understand the need for SLM since
they are the future of this country.
In brief, all these government measures highlighted above might look small but they play a big
role as a foundation for SLM in the country, therefore a foundation has already been laid for
SLM to be mainstreamed into all the sectors of the economy and society.)
The policy formulating bodies include the Cabinet, the Committee of Ministers of the Economic
Sector, the Cash Management Team and the Inter-ministerial Investment Team.
The Cabinet
This body comprises all twenty (20) ministries, chaired by the President; and is the highest
policy and decision making body at the level of the Executive Branch of government.
Committee of Ministers of the Economic Sector
This body comprises the ministries of: Finance, State for Presidential Affairs, Agriculture, Post and
Telecommunications, Planning and Economic Affairs, Transport, and Commerce and Industry.
It is hereby recommended that The Min of Lands, Mines and Energy, Forestry Development
Authority and EPA be incorporated into this committee. The Committee is chaired by the Minister
of Planning and Economic Affairs and provides leadership and guidance to the government on
economic management.
Cash Management Committee
This is an advisory body comprising representatives from various government ministries and
agencies, with a Secretariat at the Ministry of Finance. It provides guidance to the government on
fiscal management and control. It monitors revenue inflows and outflows and advices on financial
resource utilization considering, the budget, cash plan and national priorities.
77

--- Page 88 ---
The Inter-Ministerial Concession Committee
This Committee has five (5) permanent members including the ministries of Justice, Finance, Min.
of State for Presidential Affairs, Internal Affairs, Labor and the National Investment Commission.
It is chaired by the National Investment Commission. Its main mandate is to negotiate on
appropriate terms on behalf of the Government and people of Liberia concession agreements
across the various economic and development sectors that have the potential to accrue the greatest
possible benefits to the country taking into account all relevant safeguards.
Entry Points for Integrating SLM Priorities
There are three (3) possible entry points for integrating Sustainable Land Management priorities
into national agenda: (1) Through the programs and plans of the environment units in each
government ministry and/or agency. All government ministries and agencies are obliged under the
Environment Protection and Management Law to establish and maintain an environment unit. This
has enhanced intersectoral coordination on environmental matters over time. (2) The national
budgeting process – the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has provided training for three
personnel of the Department of the Budget, Ministry of Finance in mainstreaming SLM in the
national budgeting processes and resource mobilization and financial flows for SLM
implementation. (3) The other possibility would be to mainstream the SLM into the Second
Poverty Reduction Process. Since the PRSP is a government priority encompassing program, it
will ensure that once it is taken on board in the PRSP, it will automatically get a budget allocation
from government during the next 3 year period of the PRSP.
4.2 REGULATORY FRAMEWORKS INFLUENCING SLM
Besides the National Legislature which promulgates statutory laws over time, ministries and
agencies do develop sector regulations for the efficient and effective implementation of their
various mandates. In the case of Sustainable Land Management, the institutions having
responsibilities for formulating sector specific regulations include:
• Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
• Forestry Development Authority (FDA)
• Ministry of Agriculture (MOA)
• Ministry of Lands, Mines and Energy (MLME)
78

--- Page 89 ---
Enforcement under the Liberian laws is strictly the prerogative of the established national
security agencies which work in close collaboration with the respective institutions. Under the
PRS, the EPA is in the process of providing training for security officers for effective monitoring
and enforcement of environmental standards and regulations. The training effort includes the training of
customs officers at international border crossings to combat illegal trade in commodities of
environmental concern. The commodities include endangered species, hazardous wastes and
chemicals, invasive alien species and living modified organisms. The monitoring includes
prevention of illegal mining, logging and wildlife poaching in protected areas.
There are a number of specific legislations related to environment and natural resources
management including:
The National Environmental Policy of Liberia (2003)
The necessity for formulating a national environmental policy was in recognition of the severe
impact of man’s activities on all components of the natural environment, especially the
influences of population. These include high density urban areas, resource exploitation and the
further realization regarding the critical importance of restoring and maintaining environmental
quality for the welfare and development of the people. The overall goal of the national
environmental policy is to ensure long-term economic prosperity of Liberia through sustainable
social and economic development. This enhances environmental quality and resource
productivity on a long-term basis that meets the requirements of the present generation without
endangering the potential for the environment to meet the needs of future generations. The
ultimate aim of the national environmental policy is to ensure the improvement and maintenance
of the physical environment for the entire citizenry. It seeks to ensure reconciliation and
coordination between economic development and growth with the sustainable management of
the natural resources that supports it. Specifically the policy seeks to:
• Maintain ecosystems and ecological processes essential for the functioning of
the biosphere
• Ensure sound management of the natural resources and the environment
• Adequately protect human, flora, fauna, and their habitats against harmful impacts, and
preserve biological diversity
79

--- Page 90 ---
• Integrate environmental considerations in sectoral and socio-economic
planning at all levels throughout the nation
• Find common solutions to common environmental problems at regional and
international levels.
The national environmental policy also spells out priority areas of social and economic
development as follows:
• occupational health and safety
• development of human settlements
• recreational space
• national monuments and cultural heritage
• poverty alleviation
• population management
• environmental impact assessment
• environmental information
• conservation of biological diversity
• conservation and management of water resources
• conservation and management of wetlands
• environmental economics.
It also covers sustainable management of sectoral systems including land use, forest and wildlife,
protected areas, energy production and use, control of toxic and hazardous substances,
agricultural, forestry, chemicals, waste management and sanitation, marine and coastal
management, mining and mineral resources, noise and air pollution. The development of
people’s participation is portrayed as an essential step in the management of the environment.
The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Act (2003)
This Act created the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) of Liberia, as the principal
authority over all environmental programs and activities in the country. It also provides the
organizational structure of the EPA, headed by an executive director, and assisted by a deputy
executive director, legal assistant and administrative/finance assistant. The agency recognizes the
role of sectoral environmental units such as water, agriculture, maritime, energy and forestry.
80

--- Page 91 ---
These units are to work in conjunction with the respective line ministries and autonomous
agencies that are involved with the environment. The agency also has an environmental
conservation section that will oversee international environmental conventions such as the
Convention on Biological Diversity, United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,
Montreal Protocol, and the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety etc.
The Environment Protection and Management Law (2003)
The law forms the legal framework for the sustainable development, management and protection
of the environment by the Environmental Protection Agency in partnership with relevant
ministries, autonomous agencies and organizations as well as in a close and responsive
relationship with the people of Liberia. It also provides high quality information and advice on
the state of the environment and matters connected there with. The Law stresses inter-sectoral
coordination and allows for sector specific statutes. It also addresses a wide range of
environmental issues like environmental impact assessment, audit and monitoring,
environmental quality standards, pollution control and licensing, guidelines and standards for the
management of the environment and natural resources. The other issues addressed include
protection of biodiversity, national heritage and the ozone layer inspection, analysis and records,
international obligations, information access, education, public awareness and offences.
The Act Establishing the Land Commission (2009)
An Act of the National Legislature created a Land Commission in 2009, with an overall mandate
and purpose “to propose, advocate and coordinate reforms of land policy, laws and programs in
Liberia” Section 3 of this Act states that the objectives of policy and law reform shall be to
promote:
• Equitable and productive access to the nation’s land, both public and private
• Security of tenure in land and the rule of law with respect to landholding and dealings in
land
• Effective land administration and management
• Investment development of the nation’s land resources.
81

--- Page 92 ---
This Act further states that the Commission’s mandate “shall extend to all land and land based
natural resources, including both urban and rural land, private and public land, and land devoted
to residential, agricultural, industrial, commercial, forestry, conservation and any other purpose”
However, the Commission does not have an adjudicatory or implementation role. The ministry
of Lands, Mines and Energy that is in charge of survey and validation of land claims, is planning
to implement a mining and lands cadastre to account for land throughout the country.
The Act Adopting the New Forestry Reform Law of 2006
This Act repealed and replaced the Forestry Law of Liberia of 2000. The FDA which is the
implementing authority of this Law is the government entity charged with managing and
conserving community and commercial forests. The FDA manages the forest resources on the
basis of integrating the 3Cs (Commercial, Conservation and Community) as provided for by the
National Forest policy of 2006. The management and conservation of Biodiversity is left with
the Conservation Department which comprises two divisions i.e. the Wildlife and the National
Parks. The Conservation Department and the Research Unit are the logical stakeholders
involved in the initiative to establish an Access Benefits Sharing policy and legal framework.
Section 9.1 of the Law mandates the FDA to establish a Protected Forest Area Network in
addition to Conservation Corridors and incorporating existing National Forests, “to cover at least
30% of the existing forested area of Liberia, representing about 1.5 million hectares”. FDA is
also given the mandate to promote and undertake research on socio-economic conditions and on
the distribution, the habitat and population of Wildlife. This law requires the participation of
scientists, other professionals and members of non-governmental organizations in the
management of the Network and in the promulgation of appropriate regulations for In-situ
conservation.
Section 10.1 of the Law states: “To manage natural resources based on principles of
Conservation, Community and Commercial Forestry, and to ensure that local communities are
fully engaged in the sustainable management of the forest. The Forestry Development Authority
shall by Regulation grant to local communities user and management rights, transfer control of
forest use to them and build their capacity for sustainable forest management.
82

--- Page 93 ---
The Draft Wildlife Conservation and Protected Area Management Law of 2009
This is in pursuance of Section 9.11(c) of the 2006 New Forestry Reform Law that mandated the
FDA to propose for legislative enactment as a comprehensive framework for wildlife
conservation and protection. This draft law is currently being vetted to invite public inputs
before submitting for up the legislative enactment. It strictly relates to biological resources
management. Section 4.3 sets up the institutional framework for the implementation of CITES
and the FDA serves as the focal point for CITES and is given the authority to issue CITES
export, re-export and import permits or certificates in the case of marine resources, it must be
collaborated with the Bureau of National Fisheries of the Ministry of Agriculture.
Chapter 5 of the 2006 New Forestry Reform Law sets forth a permitting scheme for commercial
utilization of forest products which does not include trade in “genetic resources” but it allows for
user rights for scientific research and education that are relevant to Access and Benefit Sharing
(ABS). The expansion of this constitutes on-Timber Forest products (NTFP) trade in genetic
resources, as is now being discussed in the case of Carbon Credit and the power for the FDA to
regulate forest resources which may be valuable to the (ABS) regulatory process.
The Act adopting a New Minerals and Mining Law of 2002
The Act adopting a New Minerals and Mining Law was approved on April 3, 2002. Among other
provisions, it calls for “reasonable preventative, corrective and restorative measures to limit
pollution or contamination of, or damage to streams, dry land surfaces and the atmosphere.”
The Liberia Extractives Industries Transparency Initiative Act (LEITI) (2009)
The Extractives Industries Transparency Initiative organization has set up a global standard for
transparency in oil, gas and mining. Its effort is centered on making natural resources beneficial
to all; a coalition of government, companies and civil societies and also provides for companies
to publish what they pay and for the government to disclose what is receive. Liberia is a fully
fledged member of the EITI and the first and possibly the only country that has included the
forest sector in the implementation of this initiative and has further adopted an Act to this effect.
83

--- Page 94 ---
It can be safely said that the overall objective of this Organization is to render assistance in
ensuring that all benefits due to government and people of Liberia on the account of the
exploitation and/or extraction of the minerals and other resources are: (A) verifiably paid for or
provided (B) duly accounted for and (C) prudently utilized for the benefits of all Liberians on the
basis of equity and sustainability.
4.3 INSTITUTIONAL CONTEXT INFLUENCING SLM
The following is a run down of the National ministries and agencies involved in the development
of Liberia and are relevant for advancing the agenda of Sustainable Land Management (SLM).
The Land Commission is required to propose, advocate and coordinate reforms of land policy,
laws and programs in Liberia with ultimate aim of ensuring equitable and productive access to
the nation’s land, both public and private, security of tenure in land and the rule of law with
respect to landholding and dealings in land, and effective land administration and management.
The Commission’s mandate covers all land and land based natural resources, including both
urban and rural land, private and public land, and land devoted to residential, agricultural,
industrial, commercial, forestry, conservation and any other purpose. The commission came
from the Environment Protection and Management Law of 2006 and is intended to run for a
fixed period of 5 years.
The Ministry of Agriculture (MOA) is the central policy–making body of government for the
agricultural sector, and is responsible for promoting agricultural development and regulating the
sector. It proposes to achieve its development objectives by focusing on applied research and
extension services. MOA is organized into four major departments i.e. Planning and
Development, Research and Extension, Technical Services and the Department of
Administration. At the field level, it discharges its responsibilities through five Regional
Agricultural Offices, each headed by a Coordinator, assisted by County Agricultural
Coordinators and County and Districts Agricultural Officers and Extension technicians. The
national budget allocation to MOA of the previous government (1997 to 2002) has never
exceeded 1 percent. (This was not commensurate with the mandate and importance of this
84

--- Page 95 ---
sector). The allocation of this current government to this sector has risen from 5% in 2006 to
18% in 2010.
The Central Agricultural Research Institute (CARI) is the only research organization in the
country that has been carrying out applied and adaptive research covering food and tree crops,
livestock, aquaculture and related areas. One of its shortcomings has been its inability to transfer
new and improved technologies to farmers. Support from the central government to strengthen
its capacity is limited, making it heavily dependent on external sources. During the crisis period,
most of its facilities were destroyed, thereby diminishing its ability to function as a research
entity. In order to sustain applied and adaptive agricultural research in Liberia, there will be a
need for CARI to establish strong linkages with international research institutions such as
WARDA, IRRI, IITA, etc. Such an arrangement could facilitate expansion of its research
activities. There is need for CARI to embark on needs-based-research by linking with the
communities and counties etc.
The Ministry of Public Works is the government agency with responsibilities to provide basic
social and physical services such as feeder roads, improved sanitation and piped water as a
means to improve livelihood of rural peoples. Before the war, this agency was actively involved
in providing services to the rural areas with the support of donors.
The Liberia Produce Marketing Corporation (LPMC) is an agency of government that was
created by an act of legislation in 1961, to become responsible for marketing Liberian produce
(cocoa, coffee, palm kernel and palm products) and piassava. The Corporation is a parastatal
organization, and has a monopoly over the purchase and export of coffee and cocoa. (It is
estimated that LPMC has not paid farmers some US$3.5m for the produce it purchased in the
past years. The corporation also owes a much larger amount of money to foreign buyers for not
delivering the produce for which advances were received). At present LPMC has no capacity to
procure locally, thus it has resorted to private traders by transferring its statutory mandate of
local procurement of these commodities to the latter. The monopoly status of LPMC and the
issue related to its insolvency should be addressed as a matter of urgency as it has a major
bearing on the future development of the export crops.
85

--- Page 96 ---
The Ministry of Internal Affairs (MIA) has the responsibility for handling the entire
coordination of Local Government administration in the country. It also promotes and
encourages communal farming, particularly seed production, as a means of ensuring food
security.
The Ministry of Commerce and Industry (MOCI) has the mandate to formulate, implement and
review policies and legislations for small and medium enterprises, including agricultural–based
processing enterprises. The ministry also has the function of coordinating investment promotion
and product development as well as monitoring the overall performance of small and medium
enterprises.
The Liberia Reconstruction and Development Committee (LRDC) provides the Presidency with
a means of enhancing 1) partner coordination and 2) internal government management; i.e. a) to
enhance coordination with external partners, thus assuring key senior officials and partners are
consistently on the same development agenda; and b) to use the structure to monitor the
implementation of the national reconstruction and development agenda through the cabinet and
heads of autonomous agencies. In other words, together with the cabinet, the President should be
able to set the goal, identify working resources, and together with the respective partner
agencies, expect them to deliver and hold them accountable for results.
The LRDC structure is composed of, 4Working-Committees (WC) formed around the four
pillars of Liberia’s reconstruction and development strategy.
The four committees are:
• The Security Committee
• Economic Revitalization
• Governance and Rule of Law
• Infrastructure and Basic Services.
The WCs are co-chaired by identified sector partners and are composed of line
ministries/agencies, commissions, as well as UN Agencies, donors and key NGOs active within
86

--- Page 97 ---
the area. The WCs are responsible for coordination, monitoring, evaluation of projects and
programs and regular reporting on progress. It has a Steering Committee (SC) which serves as
the over-arching body of LRDC. It is chaired by the President with membership comprising of
key Ministers (especially the Chairs of the WC) and heads of major partner organizations
(including regional partners). The SC provides overall direction, sets very specific goals for each
group, and ensures that activities are consistent with the reconstruction and development
strategy.
The Secretariat of the SC provides coordination, monitoring and evaluation, as the operational
arm of the SC. It provides a link between the SC and its technical level organs, the WCs as well
as with other government institutions and development partners on LRDC matters which are
coordinated by the Secretariat. In this regard, the Secretariat is headed by the National
Coordinator, who reports directly to the President and the LRDC SC. The Office of the
Secretariat is composed of an Energy Specialist, Senior Economic Advisor, a Program Assistant,
and a Technical Assistant.
A wide range of institutions are involved in land management including government ministries
and agencies, national non-governmental organizations, international non-government
organizations.
Academic institutions involved with land management include:
There are three main academic institutions that will have influence on Sustainable Land
Management (SLM). The courses they offer have an influence on SLM and they are namely:
The University of Liberia which offers Bachelor of Science degrees in Agriculture, Agronomy,
Forestry, biological Sciences, Chemistry. It is also recognized for its role in research in the areas
of land resources management.
The Cuttington University which offers Bachelor of Science degrees in biological Sciences,
Chemistry, Agriculture General and integrated Rural Development. In addition to training the
institution is also into research.
87

--- Page 98 ---
The Stella Maris Polytechnic which offers Diplomas and Bachelor of Science degrees in Health
Sciences and Engineering.
Other Institutions that have a bearing on SLM:
The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA is mainly concerned with administering and
regulating land development programs
The Forestry Development Authority (FDA) is focused on land productivity and distribution
The Ministry of Agriculture leads national efforts in land productivity and food security
The Ministry of Lands, Mines and Energy works on land use and tenure
The Municipal City Corporations deal with issues of land pollutants
The SCNL focuses on education and conservation
CEEP is involved with land partnership with communities
ERADRO is pre-occupied with managing land disasters
LIFE works with Indigenous Knowledge in land management
SOLF creates the platform for wider stakeholders participation, research, information sharing
on land matters
SAMFU is into research and advocacy
SDI also works on research and advocacy
Green Advocates are concerned with rights and control over land
CI deals with conservation of land resources
FFI works on land suitability
4.4 NATIONAL PLANNING PROCESSES
To a greater extent, national planning is centralized with the ministry of planning and economic
affairs taking the lead. The ministry responsibilities include:
• Undertaking research on national development issues.
• Providing technical and research support to the Cabinet.
• Advising the Government on major issues relating to economic and social policy.
• Interpreting decisions on economic and social policy and integrating them into the
national development program.
88

--- Page 99 ---
• Preparing economic models for the guidance of policymakers, investors and other
planners.
• Assessing existing and projected social, economic and human resources and formulating
plans for the most effective use of such resources.
• Determining the economic, financial and technical feasibility of new development
projects, and coordinating the implementation of ongoing projects.
• Contributing to conceptualizing investment projects for national development.
• To collect, compile, analyze and monitor social status and economic performance data.
The ministry’s three core functions are: (1) National Economic Development Policy and
Planning (2) National Development Coordination and Management and (3) External Support
Monitoring and Coordination. The core functions of the ministry are undertaken in close
collaboration with all line ministries, agencies, state-owned enterprises, the private sector and
other development partners. It also takes into consideration relevant development realities and
other exigencies that define current operating circumstances.
Quite recently, the Government of Liberia initiated the County Development Agenda, a major
shift in development planning in the country. The CDA presents an excellent decentralized
platform where citizens representing the various clans, towns, districts and county government,
along with development partners, interact to identify the pressing needs and priority action areas
to achieve sustained development and especially addressing the issues as well as achieving the
sustained and inclusive national development described in the Poverty Reduction Strategy
2008-2011.
The Ministry of Planning and Economic Affairs is expanding on the model, and has deployed
planning officers in all fifteen counties to facilitate national planning and prioritization.
4.5 COORDINATION MECHANISMS INFLUENCING SLM
Currently, there are a few coordination mechanisms that could influence Sustainable Land
Management in the country.
(a) One is under the auspices of the Environment Coordination Unit spearheaded by
the Environmental Protection Agency where the environment units of each
89

--- Page 100 ---
government ministry and agency collaborate. The Terms of Reference were drawn
up, and all government ministries and agencies are in regular (quarterly) contacts
sharing information and setting priorities. This coordination mechanism is provided
for under the Environment Protection and Management law. This has enhanced
intersectoral coordination on environmental matters significantly. Hence the
coordination of SLM could be brought under this mechanism but a stronger
budgeting mechanism would have to be introduced.
(b) Another possible coordination modality that could be used is the Agricultural
Coordination Committee (ACC) which comprises government ministries and
agencies, community-based organizations, Local and International Non-
governmental organizations, agricultural cooperatives, research and training
institutions, and donor partners. The ACC is chaired by the Ministry of Agriculture
and meets whenever there is need.
(c) Another possibility is the existing National Coordinating Committee to Combat
Desertification and the National Steering Committee for Sustainable Land
Management. Each has its specific Terms of Reference and comprises of
representatives from government ministries and agencies, Local Non-governmental
organizations, as well as research and training institutions.
Donor coordination rests almost entirely with the Ministry of Planning and Economic Affairs.
As part of its External Support Monitoring and Coordination and as its core function, the
ministry reviews, coordinates the process and records all external aid and assistance programs (in
consultation with the Ministry of Finance). It then reports on progress of these (external aid) on
the (national development) programs, manages external cooperation agreements and programs,
collaborates with external funding agencies in the identification and implementation of
development projects. The SLM coordination which will encompass the donor coordination as
well and could follow/use any of the three mechanisms described above.
90

--- Page 101 ---
4.6 INCENTIVE FRAMEWORKS INFLUENCING SLM
The incentives that currently exist which geared towards the proper or sustainable management of
the environment are the ones built into the act establishing the EPA. Currently all the provisions in
the act are perverse incentives but nevertheless they contribute to funds that can be used for
improving the management of the land/environment and they prevent users from doing the wrong
activities on the land. Most of these provisions have not been implemented as yet and some of the
funds are paid into central government / bureaux of budget so they are not directly available to
EPA and for the purpose they were intended for. The National Environment Fund and the
Environment Trust Fund have not been formed and the fines that are paid go straight to bureau of
budget.
An EIA fund has been set and runs an account. Of the funds received into this account from
issuing of permits, 40% is for environmental activities, 30% is for EPA debts and 30% is for daily
operations.
An Environment Fund is only at the idea stage, but should receive extra taxes from private sector
operations which are constant polluters like the cement factory and any other funds that need to be
paid to EPA.
It is here recommended that: the annual fees or taxes paid can be on a sliding scale to allow the
companies to improve on reduction of their pollution. All the payments made on the basis of the
polluter pays principle could be paid into a special fund which could be used to do some remedial
as well as mitigation measures to environmental damage. One such measure could be the
implementation of the payment for plastic bags from the supermarkets and that money would go
into this fund. The minimal charge imposed on the plastic carrier bag would deter shoppers from
collecting bags every time hence reduce the plastic bags released on to the land and reusable
biodegradable bags could be imported/manufactured and sold to shoppers, stopping the use of
plastics altogether.
An extra tax can be levied on motorists who use vehicles that smoke excessively and the addition
on the normal road tax to go to the EPA special fund.
-Punitive action/penalties – for making a false statement on EIA, this will attract a fine of
USD 25 000 or 10years imprisonment.
-Same charges apply for restoration non compliance
-Environment Protection Fund will come from any charges, funding & donations,
91

--- Page 102 ---
consultancy by agency, permit fees etc.
5. PAST AND CURRENT FINANCIAL FLOWS FOR NATURAL RESOURCE
MANAGEMENT
Table 5: Funds Allocated to Relevant Sectors that Address Land Related Issues (US $)
Ministries/Agencies 2005/06 2006/07 2007/08 2008/09 2009/10 2010/11 Total YTD
Ministry of Lands, Mines & $894,400 $2,190,800 $3,306,038 $3,751,515 $3,950,000 $5,649,851 $19,742,604
Energy
Forestry Development $542,000 $2,640,000 $2,770,656 $3,239,600 $3,500,000 $3,664,110 $16,356,366
Authority
Ministry of Agriculture $501,491 $3,061,100 $3,739,587 $7,022,000 $7,250,000 $4,460,577 $26,034,755
Environmental Protection $253,258 $198,170 $465,686 $599,800 $651,480 $805,910 $2,774,304
Agency
Land Commission - - - - - $600,000 $600,000
Total Expenditure $2,191,149 $8,090,070 $10,281,967 $14,612,915 $15,351,480 $14,980,448 $65,508,029
Source: Field Survey, 2010
The table above shows how funds were allocated to five (5) government ministries and agencies
that address land related issues for 6 years, covering the fiscal periods 2005/2006 to 2010/2011.
During the first fiscal period, all 5 ministries and agencies combined got US$2,191,149.00 rising
to US$14,980,440 in the 6th year.
6. SOURCES OF FINANCING FOR SLM
6.1 INTERNAL
This sector will review the available financing from the GOL that is currently channeled to the
environment sector, its management and its protection ie the funds channeled to the EPA. It will
also review the financing that is allocated to the associated ministries and agenecies that are viewed
as having a stake in the degradation of the land and hence will have a stake in the sustainable
management of the land. There are primarily the ministries of Lands, mines and Energy,
Agriculture and Internal Affairs, Land Commission and the Forestry Development Authority.
These ministries and agencies receive their allocation annually from the budgeting process
92

--- Page 103 ---
described below, which allows them to make their own prioritization. The budgetary allocation to
this cluster of ministries has gradually increased from a mere 5 % in 2005/6 budget to 18% in the
current 2010/11 budget, signifying the importance this government is putting on this sector.
In addition to this cluster, all other ministries have established environment units which meet
regularly to discuss environment management challenges they face in their ministries. These EUs
are mandated by the EPA to mainstream environmental units into the workplans and budgets of
their ministries. They might not currently have any special allocations for environmental issues but
they have the potential to do so.
Budgeting Process
During the Government of Liberia national budgetary process, line ministries and agencies having
specific tasks and responsibilities for environmental management and protection are required to
make proposals for how they intend to implementation their various programs. These activities are
prioritized and costed, and presented to the Department of the Budget, Ministry of Finance. Each
line ministry and agency is given the opportunity to defend its proposal. At the end of the process,
a bulk figure or amount is approved and sent back to the ministries and agencies for re-
prioritization and adjustment taking into consideration the adjusted figure. In most cases, the
amount approved is lower than the proposed due to competing advances for national financial
resources.
As described above, the budgeting process clearly encourages the ministries or agencies to make
their own priorities. The existing entry points for the SLM would be these environment units and
since they are all part of the Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS) each agency and ministry should
also flag the activities to mainstream SLM.
Sector financing
There are currently no direct sector financing that could be channeled towards the SLM, but the
potential and ideas are there. The following is a list of sect oral ministries and agencies that already
have workplans supported by budgets that have an allocation devoted to the management of the
environment operated through their Environmental Units.
1. Ministry of Lands, Mines and Energy
2. Forestry Development Authority
93

--- Page 104 ---
3. Ministry of Agriculture
4. Environmental Protection Agency
5. Land Commission
6. Ministry of Internal Affairs
They also have the potential to raise their own funds from the public and private sector for the
services that they perform and regulate and they can create special funds for SLM management.
Decentralised budgetary opportunities
As described earlier in the section on budgetary process the GOL has recently introduced a
decentralized planning system which will later be followed by decentralized budgeting. This
approach will allow the counties and later districts to bring on board their own priorities and
could request for the remediation or mitigation on a specific piece of land. This also allows them
to monitor closely that the funds are used for that aspect in the district as requested.
National Funds for Local Development
The following is a list of ideas and suggestions that could be used to increase or intensify
development at the local levels, hence the SLM should tap into these ideas or initiatives.
-UNDP promotes local area development through its UN Capital Development Fund
(UNCDF) which is already funding the reconstruction monitored by the Liberia
Reconstruction and Development Committee
-USAID is financing rehabilitation of local areas
-County Development is being funded from two sources, (1) the extractive industries
fund like Mittal Steel, LAMCO directly (2) the government is allocating 25% of all
government revenue to county development.
National NGOs funding:
The following is a list of possible and willing funders for local NGOs in Liberia. SLM could be
funded through a number of these sources raising a substantial percentage of the SLM budget
94

--- Page 105 ---
over the 8 year implementation period. These have been selected because they have close links
with SLM.
-Cities Alliance – focuses on poverty reduction and the development of sustainable cities
-Flagship Fund –can fund the protection of endangered species and their habitats
-Textile Recycling for Aid and International Development(TRAID)-poverty reduction through
recycling ventures.
-UN Habitat Urban Youth Fund-can fund up to USD 25000.00 by Norway Gov. for sustainable
cities development.
-GEF – USD 1 billion for environment sustainability
-UN Trafficking Funding for NGOs through the GEF Small Grants Facility for poverty reduction
and through sustainable projects
-Renewable Energy Fund by REEEP – for renewable energy and energy efficiency
-Toyota Environment Grant Program – for any environment program.
-European Development Fund (EDF)-for poverty reduction with sustainability
-Club300 Bird Protection Fund-from Swedish birdwatchers – for the protection of birds and their
habitats.
-US-ADF –for community initiatives or development
-Tourism Care Worldwide Grant- for habitat protection
-African Enterprise Challenge Fund (AECF)- for agriculture, renewable energy and climate
change program.
-UK-DFID- for poverty reduction
-ILO Social Finance Program – funds between USD 100 000 and 500 000.00 for social aspects in
environment development.
Other–in–country financing
There is a potential that the few economically viable Private players could finance some
activities in SLM, especially the issues that they are interest. An interest and a deep
understanding would have to be cultivated among the local business players.
95

--- Page 106 ---
Training and research institutions in the country do access finance for research and to build
capacity through training, hence this could be considered as funds that could advance the cause
for SLM and funds could also focus on the research on SLM in specific location
Recommendations
-It is here recognized that the best way of mobilizing the internal finances would be to
incorporate SLM into the Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS), a government initiative that brings
together all government ministries come together and focus on one goal and rationalize the
expenditure. This is the most comprehensive government program that focuses on a core
problem that has a bearing on SLM. This PRS also enforces complementarity among government
ministries and agencies. Therefore through this program a consolidated approach can be made to
allocate funds for the SLM program and by incorporating SLM into the PRS helps to make the
SLM the centre-stage for all actions and programs as well like the PRS itself.
6.2 EXTERNAL
Donors
The following is a list of donors that are known to be sympathetic to the environment and natural
resources management worldwide. Some of these donors are already involved with the current
government on a number of projects or program as indicated in the current budget
1. World Bank: In the current budget it has contributed USD103.399 millions
2. EU: has contributed USD 115.299millions
3. Forest Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF): Has currently made available to Liberia a sum of
USD 3.6 million
4. AfDB : Has contributed USD30.8 millions
5. GEF : Has current provided funds to the tune of USD 43.00 millions
6 UNDP: has spearheaded a number of projects with USD8.2 millions
96

--- Page 107 ---
Main Donors for Liberia
Since the end of the civil war Liberia has since an influx of donors especially with the current
government, during the first 5 years after the end of the civil war China dominated the seen.
Currently the USA is the main donor with its pledges of USD 230 million in the last two. All the
other donors from the country’s Round Table Conference in 2008 can be since with their pledges
on table 6. It is also observed that 6 of the donors were sympathetic to the environment and
related development including agriculture, so these are the donors that SLM project will follow
up. As can be observed in table 6 most of them is already funding some activities in Liberia
showing the confidence they have in the current administration. The peace and stability
currently enjoyed by the country is a further encouragement for donors to work with the current
administration.
97

--- Page 108 ---
Table 6. Donor contribution to the Liberian budget.
98

--- Page 109 ---
Other funders – NGOs
The following is a list of other funders and possible funders. Some of these have already worked
with some government ministries, agencies or directly with the communities. It is envisaged that
since these organizations have already shown interest in Liberia they will continue to source funds
for the protection of the Liberian environment.
1.Darwin Initiative, UK: This body is concerned with environmental conservation and Sapo
National Park and the establishment of more protected Areas in Liberia. Also involved in the
Strengthening of Biodiversity in West Africa project and the establishment of environmental
governance platform in Nimba mountain with Birdlife International.
2. Birdlife International: Got involved in Liberia with the establishment of the Society for the
Conservation of Nature in Liberia since 1986. It focuses on the conservation education and
awareness building. Currently involved in Liberia with the conservation and monitoring of the
Liberian Greenbul and the White-neck-picathartes in the Wenegisi mountain where they nest.
3. International Union the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources(IUCN) –current
funding a number of projects and a number of studies .
4. Conservation International (CI)- worked in Liberia in the early years of post-conflict Liberia
5. Flora and Fauna International (FFI) – currently working in Sapo National Park
Recmmendations
These international NGOs can be easily mobilized by the office of the Ex. Director of the
Environmental Protection Agency, since they already have a rapport and experience in working
with these NGOs -how to best mobilize them.
6.3 INNOVATIVE FINANCING
Innovative Sources
This aspect of the financing for the environmental issues hence the SLM have not been looked into
a large extent. Although there is a lot of potential in this area but lot has still to be done on this line
and then the response will depend on the other parties. Having emerged from a long civil war the
country has been grappling with basic issues like putting together the policies and legal
frameworks within which to operate. The following sections are a description of a few attempts
that have been initiated.
99

--- Page 110 ---
Innovative financing is financing that is non-traditional i.e. going beyond ODA and Government
budgets. This is finance that could be coming from internal, external, private and public sources. It
is necessary for a program of the magnitude of SLM to canvass for innovative financing ways for
the following reasons: it increases the finances, it allows diversification in the finance base, and it
complements other finances and maximizes the impact of the project or program.
The main actors and institutions are the Private sector i.e. companies, finance institutions, farmers,
Civil Society Organizations, foundations, emerging donors and local governments. The thematic
entry points for this type of finance include: poverty reduction and rural development, biodiversity
conservation areas, security and agriculture or climate change mechanisms. It could have an
investment based mechanism would include issues like micro finances (credit and insurance,
environmental funds, Green Venture Capital funds as well as environment performance bonds. It
could also have the following forms i.e. co-financing or subsidies, open trading e.g. emission
trading, GHG mitigation and self-organized private deals marketing deals like payment of land-
users for environment services and eco-labeling of products.
If well-structured, the private sector is potential investors and funders and these would be the small
farmers, pastoralists who could invest in land and market based deals. They would be motivated to
invest if they can get tax rebates, subsidies or if the polluter-pays-principle is applied e.g. soil
erosion causers, green branding of products whereby the costs is included in the product price e.g.
organic products. Companies like the Breweries, coca Cola etc would focus at the reduction in
Carbon dioxide. Other possibilities are NGOs like WWF, ICRAF as well as Public-private–
partnerships whereby the Private Sector will finance a public institution due to incentives that were
offered, this would facilitate a scaling-up of successful initiatives or funding collaborative research
etc.
Other incentive and market based measures like the “permanent conservation easement”, control
farmland set-asides, payment for proven investments in land conservation, application of
environment or green taxes and subsidies. There is open-trading under regulation initiatives like
conservation banks, trading of emission rights e.g. Kyoto CDM. There are also the self-organized
private deals e.g. environment youth corps who would work on environment rehabilitation like soil
conservation, re-afforestation etc funded up to 80% by government. Other examples are the
Community Based Natural Resources Management (CBNRM) initiatives which have been seen to
be effective in countries like Zimbabwe.
100

--- Page 111 ---
Essentially all these possibilities can be introduced to supplement and complement the regular
government and donor funds, but it is essential that for this to happen the environment should be
conducive. Since SLM is a long term investment, security of tenure will be required and proper
land policies should be put in place for this financing to take off. Therefore, in any country it is
essential to identify what needs to be corrected (environment), identify the incentives, and mobilize
the stakeholders for action to start. It is therefore very crucial that this of kind of innovative
funding is initiated for a program like the SLM to become self-propelling.
It is recognized here that there is a lot of potential for Liberia in the areas of debt-for-nature
swaps, payment for ecosystem services, as well as the carbon financing mechanisms like
Voluntary carbon markets, Clean Development Mechanism and REDD initiative. In the
meantime the country is sorting out its policies and legal frameworks to tape into these
mechanisms.
Environment Fund (fees, fines, taxes, bonds and other royalties for conservation)
An attempt has already been made in this regard by enshrining the creation of an Environmental
Fund into the EPA Act 2003. Although this has not been set up as yet collection of fines for
environmental defaulters, permit fees are now being collected and the money is still deposited
with the central government.
Suitable Innovative Sources
Of the whole range of financial mechanisms and instruments that have been described above the
following are thought to be the most suitable that Liberia should be pursuing. Notwithstanding
the importance of all the other financing mechanisms the following should be prioritized are:
-debt-for-nature swaps should be high on the list of priorities
-voluntary carbon markets to capitalize on the existing forests in Liberia
-Self organized private deals where land users are paid for environmental services.
-The punitive measures that are already in place should be maintained since the certainly
seem to be making an impact on reducing the negative impacts on the environment by
organizations and companies etc.
101

--- Page 112 ---
Needed Accompanying Measures
The following are the required accompanying measures that are needed for the above priorities
financing mechanisms to be implemented effectively and efficiently.
-the existence of a strong environmental policy and environmental law saves as the most
important measure for the implementation of the mechanisms.
-this has to be followed by clearly spelt out regulations
-monitoring and evaluation structures have to put in place to ensure compliance.
CONCLUSION
It can be conclude from the national analysis that there is a high potential for the Liberian
environment to be degraded from a climatic perspective as well as a biophysical perspective.
In addition to the natural causes there are also anthropogenic causes which have the human
being at the centre hence the remedial measures will have to have the that same human being
at the centre again. The extent and trends of land degradation have been found to be closely
associated with the human activities as well as the density of the human population.
It is highlighted in the sections above how the policy and legal frameworks before and after
the civil conflict has influenced the degradation patterns in the country. Although the
relevant institutions have been involved in the regulation of the environment they have been
allowed to be the judges on themselves. It is with the advent of the EPA that the coordination
of the SLM related issues has gained momentum and direction.
It is clear from the analysis above that the area of natural resources management is gradually
gaining importance over the years especially with the current administration. It is agreed
that the financing of the SLM activities will have to be three pronged ie internal financing
which will reflect the commitment of the government to the SLM program. Then the external
financing will be essential to meet the global obligations of the MEAs and will further boost
the activities that are financed internally. The two processes of financing for SLM will be
further complemented by the innovative financing mechanism that will see the whole
national come on board. What are seen to be the most appropriate mechanisms for Liberia
are highlighted. EPA is challenged to take it upon itself to coordinate the SLM activities
including those that will be implemented by other ministries and government agencies.
102

--- Page 113 ---
References
UNEP.(2004). Desk Study on the Environment in Liberia
UNDP.(2006). National Human Development Report for Liberia
EPA, (2003). The National Environment Management Policy. EPA, Monrovia.
EPA, (2003). The Environment Protection and Management Act of Liberia. EPA. Monrovia
EPA.(2003). An Act Establishing the Environment Protection Agency. Monrovia
EPA, (2004). National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan for Liberia.
EPA, (2005). Vulnerability and Adaptation in Liberia. Monrovia. Liberia
EPA. (2006). First State of the Environment Report for Liberia. Monrovia
FDA. (2000). An Act Adopting A New National Forestry Law of Liberia. Monrovia.
FDA. (2006). An Act Adopting the New Forestry Reform Law. Monrovia
MLME, (1999). The New Minerals and Mining Law of Liberia, MLME. Monrovia.
UNFCCC (1998. Kyoto Protocol. Climate change Secretariat. Bonn.
GOL (2009). An Act To establish the Land Commission
GOL.(2009). An Act To Establish The Liberian Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
GOL. (2009). The Draft Wildlife Conservation and Protected Areas Management Law
103