--- Page 1 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
REPUBLIC OF NAMIBIA
Ministry of Environment & Tourism
1 1 1

--- Page 2 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
2

--- Page 3 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
Republic of Namibia
Ministry of Environment & Tourism
THIRD NATIONAL ACTION
PROGRAMME FOR NAMIBIA
TO IMPLEMENT THE UNITED
NATIONS CONVENTION TO COMBAT
DESERTIFICATION
2014-2024
3

--- Page 4 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
4

--- Page 5 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
Table of Contents
Foreword 9
Preface 11
Executive Summary 13
Acknowledgements 18
Acronyms and Abbreviations 19
1. Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought – A critical threat to national
development in Namibia 21
1.1 Background 21
1.2 Status of Land Degradation 22
1.3 Causes of Desertification and Land Degradation 23
1.3.1 High Levels of Poverty in the Rural Areas 24
1.3.2 Population Presssure 24
1.3.3 Land reform and Resettlement and Land Tenure 25
1.3.4 Unsustainable Use of Water Resources 26
1.3.5 Inadequate Capacity 26
1.3.6 Inadequate Mechanism for Cross-Sector Collaboration for Sustainable
Land Management 26
1.3.7 Weak Financing Mechanisms for Sustainable Land Management 27
1.3.8 Inadequate Application of Technology for Dry Land Production 27
1.3.9 Climate Change 27
1.4 Manifestations and Impacts of Land Degradation in Namibia 28
1.4.1 Overgrazed and Overstocked Land 28
1.4.2 Bush Encroached Land 29
1.4.3 Deforested Land 29
1.4.4 Soil Degradation 30
1.4.5 Water Degradation 30
2. Building on a Solid Foundation – Policy Framework for Sustainable Land Management
and National Programmes on Sustainable Land and Natural Resources Management 31
2.1 Vision 2030 31
2.2 National Development Plan 4 31
5

--- Page 6 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
2.3 Land Management Policies And Practices To Address Desertification, Land
Degradation And Drought 31
2.3.1 Agriculture Sector 31
2.3.2 Water Sector 33
2.3.3 Forestry and Wildlife and Environment Sectors 34
2.3.4 Lands Sector 35
2.4 Learning from Previous Programmes on Land and Natural Resources Management 36
2.4.1 Namibia’s Programme to Combat Desertification, 1994-2005 (NAPCOD) 36
2.4.2 Country Pilot Partnership (CPP) Programme (2007-2012) 38
2.4.3 Namibia’s Community Based Natural Resources Management Programme (CBNRM) 39
2.4.4 Bilateral and Multilateral Projects linked to Desertification, Land
Degradation and Drought 41
2.4.5 Funding mechanisms for Sustainable Land Management in Namibia 43
2.5 Key Lessons Learned 43
3. Implementing International Best Practices and Developments at Home 45
3.1 The Adoption of the Global UNCCD Strategy (2008-2018) 45
3.2 Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought post Rio+20 Summit 46
3.3 The Namib Declaration from UNCCD COP11 in Windhoek 46
3.4 Relevant African Union Decisions 47
3.5 Promoting Synergies With National Instruments to Implement the
United Nations Conventions on Climate Change (UNFCCC) And Biodiversity (CBD) 47
4. Framework of the Third National Action Programme to Combat Desertification,
Land Degradation and Drought 49
4.1 Methodology 49
4.2 Objective of NAP3 49
4.3 Key Outcomes of NAP3 49
4.4 Key Outputs per Outcome 50
4.4.1 Outcome 1: By 2018 information on the risks Namibia faces and the need
to combat desertification at a national scale is produced, made easily accessible and
actually used by policy makers, land managers, research and educational institutions 50
4.4.2 Outcome 2: Policy and institutional frameworks are effectively implemented
and strengthened to address desertification, land degradation and drought by 2024 51
6

--- Page 7 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
4.4.3 Outcome 3: A functional DLDD Monitoring System in place by 2018 and supportive
processes are in place by 2018 for Namibia to move towards land degradation
neutrality 52
4.4.4 Outcome 4: Degradation and desertification processes in Focal Landscapes
are halted and reversed by 2024, and communities and ecosystems strengthened
to mitigate the impacts of drought 52
4.4.5 Outcome 5: Financial lending and grant making facilities are in place
and supporting communities and small farmers to implement sustainable land
management by 2017 54
4.4.6 Outcome 6: Research on aspects of sustainable land management and
climate change science in support of adaptation and mitigation are
mainstreamed in research and tertiary educational institutions and extension
services by 2020 55
5. Institutional Arrangements For Implementation Of The Third National
Action Programme 56
5.1 Key Stakeholders for Implementation of NAP3 56
5.2 Monitoring and Evaluation of NAP3 57
5.3 Estimated 5-year Budget for National Action Programme of Namibia 58
List of References 59
Annex I: Tables Of Key Outcomes, Outputs And Related To Indicative Activities
Of The Namibia National Action Programme 62
7

--- Page 8 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
TABLE OF FIGURES
Figure 1: Average annual rainfall and average plant production in Namibia 21
Figure 2: Maps on soil suitability for crop production and livestock production 22
Figure 3: Linkages between human populations, poverty and development & LDD 23
Figure 4: Poor households per region, in % of all households, 2003/04 4 24
Figure 5: Human population density and cattle density in Namibia 25
Figure 6: Stocking density and carrying capacity in kg/hectare in Namibia 28
Figure 7: Land gradation risk map of 1997 37
Figure 8: Map of registered conservancies in 2013 40
LIST OF TABLES
Table 1: Achievements of the CPP Programme (Source: MET, 2013) 39
Table 2: Achievement of Namibia’s CBNRM at the end of 2012 (Source: NACSO 2012) 41
Table 3: New and ongoing projects addressing SLM and UNCCD objectives in Namibia 42
Table 4: Summary of operational objectives of the UNCCD Global Strategy 45
Table 5: List of national partners for the implementation of NAP3 56
Table 6: Summary of estimated 5-year budget for NAP3 58
8

--- Page 9 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
Foreword
Land degradation is a complex phenomenon.
For Namibia, as for other countries, land
degradation is not only about land, but also about
the people. In our country, the majority of the
population is directly affected by the depletion
of natural resources. This is aggravated by the
erosion of the capacity of our land, water and
biological resources to sustain our population.
To overcome these challenges, our Government
and people remain committed to the
constitutional imperative of conserving the
natural environment and our ecosystems. The
maintenance of ecosystems, essential ecological
processes and biological diversity of Namibia
and utilization of living natural resources on a
sustainable basis for the benefit of all Namibians, both present and future are provided for in
Article 95 (1) of our supreme law. In our efforts to fulfil this provision, Namibia has ratified several
international instruments including the three Rio Conventions, which emerged from the 1992 Rio
Earth Summit, on Biodiversity; Combating Desertification; and Climate Change. The conventions
have served as a foundation for the development of legislation, policies and strategies to address
constraints related to the management of our natural resources in Namibia.
The successful compilation and launch of the National Action Programme for Namibia to Combat
Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought (2014-2024) is a further demonstration of our
Government’s commitment to integrate sustainable land management into national development
priorities. It is a continuation of the good work done under the National Action Programme to
Combat Desertification (1994-2005) and the Country Pilot Partnership Programme (2007-2012).
Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought (DLDD) are significant threats to our long term
national development objectives. The most alarming effects of land degradation including
deforestation, the diminishing availability of flora and perennial grasses, soil erosion and bush
encroachment, undermine the functional integrity of our dryland ecosystems. Therefore, the focus
of this National Action Programme goes beyond the issue of land degradation and seeks to address
DLDD holistically.
I wish to underscore our full commitment to addressing the complex challenges of DLDD. Namibia
looks forward to integrating innovative solutions and commitments emerging at the international
level to address DLDD. In line with the Namib Declaration, which was adopted at the 11th
Conference of the Parties to the UNCCD in 2013, our country is fully committed to the achievement
of land degradation neutrality, the advancement of the science policy interface, enhancing drought
9

--- Page 10 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
mitigation efforts, engaging the private sector, and empowering our local communities and women
to tackle the challenge of DLDD.
This approach is consistent with the Government commitments to achieve our long-term national
development strategy, Vision 2030. While Vision 2030 recognises that natural resources alone
cannot sustain Namibia’s long-term development, it re-affirms the need for the country to diversify
its economy. In this regard, land and its associated natural resources are recognised as vital
elements of Namibia’s development. I am confident that the effective implementation of the
National Action Programme (2014-2024) will contribute greatly towards the conservation and
sustainable utilisation of our land and other natural resources towards the realisation of Vision
2030.
__________________
Hifikepunye Pohamba
PRESIDENT
10

--- Page 11 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
Preface
The Republic of Namibia was one of the first
countries in the world to incorporate an
environmental and sustainable development
clause in its national constitution. To bring this
clause into effect, it established a dedicated
environmental agency, the Department of
Environmental Affairs (DEA), in the Ministry of
Environment and Tourism (MET).
As national focal point to the United Nations
Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD),
the DEA has led calls and initiatives aimed at
combating desertification, land degradation
and drought with excellent support from
partner ministries, tertiary institutions, civil
society organisations, donor agencies and other
stakeholders.
This strategic document seeks to build on the progress we have made through our previous two
National Action Programmes (NAPs) to the UNCCD, which were known as the Namibia National
Action Programme to Combat Desertification (NAPCOD) (1994-2005), and the Country Pilot
Partnership (CPP) Programme (2007-2012) respectively.
These two NAPs placed sustainable land management at the forefront of our efforts to address
the threats posed by desertification, land degradation and drought, and have delivered substantial
benefits to our affected communities and ecosystems. In spite of these successes, the pressures on
our ecosystems and rural communities continue to increase due to impacts from climate change
and continuing social challenges.
This Third National Action Programme calls for strong interventions to combat desertification, land
degradation and drought based on our national priorities and unique circumstances. It also promotes
a more synergistic approach to sustainable land management, climate change adaptation and the
conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity, all of which are closely linked in the Namibian
context.
While focusing on our national needs and priorities, this National Action Programme also promotes
the adoption of emerging best practices at the international level including land degradation
neutrality and making the economic case for sustainable land management. Namibia is also
committed to working closely with its sub-regional and regional partners given the importance of
issues of desertification, land degradation and drought to the African continent.
11

--- Page 12 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
I would like to acknowledge the intensive two-year consultative process undertaken to develop
this National Action Programme. This involved a broad range of stakeholders at both national and
international level. I would like to thank all stakeholders for their recommendations and inputs into
what is truly a nationally-owned document.
The Ministry of Environment and Tourism looks forward to working with all stakeholders to implement
this National Action Programme and improve the conditions of livelihoods and ecosystems affected
by desertification, land degradation and drought across the country. This will require the best
efforts from all of us.
_______________
Uahekua Herunga
Minister of Environment and Tourism
12

--- Page 13 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
Executive Summary
This document describes Namibia’s environment, desertification, land degradation and drought
processes, and the threats to its land based agricultural production. The root causes of land
degradation are explained, as are the different types of land degradation, which occur due to these
root causes. The root causes of land degradation and barriers to the implementation of sustainable
land management in Namibia include:
i. High Levels of Poverty in the rural areas
ii. Population Presssure
iii. Land reform, Resettlement and Land Tenure
iv. Unsustainable use of water resources
v. Inadequate systemic, institutional and individual Capacity
vi. Inadequate mechanism for cross-sector collaboration for sustainable land management
vii. Weak financing mechanisms for sustainable land management
viii. Inadequate application of technology for dry land production
ix. Climate Change
These root causes have led to three main types of land degradation in Namibia - namely: I. Vegetation
Degradation, a category that includes rangeland degradation, deforestation and degradation of
dry forests and woodlands, II. Soil Degradation, a category that includes wind and water induced
erosion of soils and the loss of soil fertility, and III. Water Degradation, which refers to the negative
effect on water quantity and quality caused by unsustainable water resources management and
changes in ecosystem function linked to DLDD.
This Third National Action Programme (NAP3) lays out Namibia’s objectives and interventions to
address these root causes and manifestations of land degradation. The objectives and desired
outcomes of NAP3 also closely align with the strategic and operational objectives of the United
Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD). Namibia views the sustainable management
of land as the key basis for addressing the threats posed by desertification, land degradation
and drought (DLDD). The interventions proposed in NAP3 are strategic in nature and intend to
mainstream sustainable land management within the programmes of the different land-based
sectors and donor-supported projects in Namibia.
The objective of NAP3 is to:
“Prevent and reverse desertification and land degradation in affected areas and to mitigate the
effects of drought in Namibia in support of poverty reduction and environmental sustainability”.
It seeks to build on the foundations laid by its earlier national action programmes (NAPCOD and the
13

--- Page 14 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
CPP Programme) as well as ongoing good practices in the area of sustainable land management.
NAP3 is designed around six outcomes, which mainly target the achievement of the first two
strategic objectives of the UNCCD 10 Year Strategic Plan - that is to improve the living conditions of
affected populations, and to improve the condition of affected ecosystems.
The six desired outcomes of NAP3 cover the themes of advocacy awareness and education; policy
and institutional framework for DLDD; monitoring system for DLDD; on-the-ground action to prevent
and reverse land degradation; financial support; and research and development. The outcomes and
the ouputs per outcome are as follows:
Outcome 1: By 2018, information on the risks Namibia faces and the need to combat desertification
at a national scale is produced, made easily accessible and actually used by policy makers, land
managers, research and educational institutions.
Outputs relevant to Outcome 1
i. Policy advocacy papers on Sustainable Land Management and desertification produced and
publicised, and gender-based dimensions mainstreamed in Sustainable Land Management
Programmes and policy issues.
ii. Annual desertification, land degradation and climate change adaptation newsletter
distributed to all educational and research institutions in Namibia.
iii. Reports on the management, rehabilitation and recovery of focal landscapes.
iv. Information from the Land Degradation Monitoring System publicised, distributed, and
discussed in public fora.
v. Publication of climate change scenarios and risks for Namibia and their implications on local
adaptation needs.
Outcome 2: Policy and institutional frameworks are effectively implemented and strengthened to
address desertification, land degradation and drought by 2024.
Outputs relevant to Outcome 2
i. Permanent institutional structure in place to further cross-sector collaboration on
implementation of SLM programmes and initiatives for combating desertification.
ii. Integration of NAP3 and broader promotion of sustainable land management into Namibia’s
5th National Development Plan (2018-2023).
iii. Local level governance structures linked to sustainable land management further
14

--- Page 15 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
strengthened and empowered – such as conservancy committees, community forests,
communal land boards, basin management committees, water point associations, livestock
marketing committees etc.
iv. Critical review undertaken of implementation of the National Drought Management Policy
and Strategy (1997).
Outcome 3: A functional DLDD Monitoring System and supportive processes are in place by 2018 for
Namibia to move towards land degradation neutrality.
Outputs relevant to Outcome 3
i. Institutional collaborative structure in place to collect data and information on land
degradation and the health of land in Namibia – including variables such as soil moisture, soil
fertility, forest cover changes, rangelands, crop yields, livestock productivity, temperature,
rainfall,or flooding patterns.
ii. Target setting and implementation of the Land Degradation Neutrality concept is undertaken.
iii. An information gathering protocol and a functional database for storage and retrieval of
data and information on the state and degradation of land and its natural resources.
iv. A shared GIS-Internet Platform (database) for stakeholders to upload and share data and
information, administered by a central designated authority.
v. Publication of and access to data on trends in thematic areas (forest cover, bush
encroachment, range conditions, droughts, floods) – and interpretation of the trends in
actionable terms.
Outcome 4: Desertification and land degradation processes in Focal Landscapes are halted and
reversed by 2024, and affected communities and ecosystems strengthened to mitigate the impacts
of drought.
Outputs relevant to Outcome 4
i. At least 5 focal landscapes in Namibia are identified for best practice SLM and rehabilitation,
representing a mixture of land uses and including at least one bush encroached site.
ii. Publication of baseline environmental and socio-economic data for each focal landscape to
aid and guide future monitoring. This will include comprehensive vulnerability assessment
reports, particularly with regard to climate change.
iii. Upscaling of best SLM practices within and around focal landscapes (drip irrigation,
sustainable basin-level water resources management, conservation agriculture, improved
range management, community based conservation etc) for immediate implementation.
This will draw upon the achievements of past initiatives in Namibia namely the CPP and
15

--- Page 16 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
NAPCOD.
iv. Empowerment plans for women and vulnerable groups, linked to restoration programmes
in the focal landscapes.
v. Programmes to improve the structures and functions of local institutions (Conservancy and
Community Forestry Committees, Community-based Water Point Management, Integrated
Water Resources Management at basin level, Forums for Integrated Resource Management
or FIRMS, Livestock Marketing and Range Management Committees) who will be partners
in the management and restoration of the ‘Focal Landscapes’.
vi. Research and publication of baseline land use and socio-economic data for each focal
landscape to aid and guide future monitoring. Empowerment plans for women and
vulnerable groups in the focal landscapes.
Outcome 5: Financial lending and grant making facilities are in place and supporting communities
and small farmers to implement sustainable land management by 2017.
Outputs relevant to Outcome 5
i. A competitive grants schemes for individual farmers and farmer associations or groups.
ii. Strategy on farmer support financing including low interest loans for SLM and improved
production technologies and practices.
iii. A forum for the promotion of financing of improved land and natural resources management
– led by an institution such as the Environmental Investment Fund or AgriBank.
iv. A dedicated government fund for multi-sector projects associated with SLM, in effect a
Statutory SLM Fund.
Outcome 6: Research on aspects of sustainable land management and climate change science
in support of adaptation and mitigation are mainstreamed in research and tertiary educational
institutions and extension services by 2020.
Outputs relevant to Outcome 6
i. An assessment report on required capacities to implement a national programme to promote
SLM and combat desertification.
ii. A technical skills development plan to improve national capacity for research, monitoring
and implementation of SLM and anti-desertification programmes (Examples: climate
change modelling and scenario building, GIS and Remote Sensing, stress physiology in
crops, animal and plant breeding).
iii. A research plan to assess the sensitivity and response of Focal Landscapes to rehabilitation
programmes – (Research themes – climate change and stress tolerance in crops and
16

--- Page 17 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
animals, water and nutrient efficiency in crops, climate induced movement of flora and
fauna, development of degradation indices, modelling economic aspects of degradation,
desertification and adoption of improved technologies).
iv. Training modules on climate change and SLM issues developed for inclusion into the curricula
of tertiary institutions of Namibia.
v. Institutional partnerships, including public private partnerships, for research and training
created and existing ones strengthened.
The implementation of NAP3 will be coordinated by the Department of Environment Affairs of the
Ministry of Environment and Tourism, as the national focal point to the UNCCD. The Department
of Environmental Affairs will also serve as Secretariat to a national Sustainable Land Management
Committee to oversee the implementation of NAP3. This technical committee will involve a number
of ministries (particularly the ministries engaged in land and natural resources management),
donor agencies, tertiary institutions, civil society organisations and private sector representatives.
The monitoring and evaluation of NAP3 will also be coordinated through the Department of
Environmental Affairs with support from the cross-sectoral Sustainable Land Management Committee.
All of the activities prioritised in NAP3 are to be implemented by institutions represented on the
Sustainable Land Management Committee, which will facilitate the in-house monitoring of NAP3
on an annual basis. An independent mid-term evaluation of NAP3 will be undertaken in mid-2018
as well as a final independent evaluation in 2024, which will also provide lessons and direction for
the development of a fourth NAP as appropriate.
For the first 5-year period of NAP3, the required total budget is estimated at N$51.3 million,
of which 63.5 % will be devoted to actual restoration and SLM programmes in the five focal
landscapes and 16.4 % on programme coordination, including the monitoring and evaluation of
NAP3. The budget will be reviewed after a comprehensive assessment of needs for the remaining
period of NAP3 based on what has been achieved in the first five years.
17

--- Page 18 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
Acknowledgements
The Department of Environmental Affairs, Ministry of Environment and Tourism, acknowledges
those cooperating partners who co-funded the consultative process that led to the drafting of
this document. The stakeholders in Namibia who were consulted prior to the drafting of the
document and those who participated in the meetings to review and improve the document are
also acknowledged and commended for their valuable insights. The Department of Environmental
Affairs recognises the importance that various local and international stakeholders attach to the
issue of combating desertification, land degradation and drought. Consequently we re-affirm our
commitment to implement this action programme, which is not only in the national interest and will
give meaning to Namibia’s constitutional provisions on environment and sustainable development,
but will also contribute to global benefits.
We thank the Environmental Investment Fund, Gesellschaft fur Internationale Zusammenarbeit and
the Secretariat of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification for their financial and
technical support.
18

--- Page 19 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
Acronyms and Abbreviations
AGRA Agricultural Cooperative of Namibia
CALLC Enhancing Institutional and Human Resource Capacity through Local Level
Coordination of Integrated Rangeland Management and Support
CANAM Conservancy Association of Namibia
CBNRM Community Based Natural Resource Management
CCA Climate Change Adaptation
CPP Country Pilot Partnership
DEA Department of Environmental Affairs
DLDD Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought
DRFN Desert Research Foundation of Namibia
EIF Environmental Investment Fund
FIRM Forum for Integrated Resource Management
GEF Global Environment Facility
GoN Government of Namibia
IGM Innovative Grant Mechanism
IRDNC Integrated Rural Development and Nature Conservation
ISLM Integrated Sustainable Land Management
KMS Knowledge Management System
LDMS Land Degradation and Monitoring System
LFA Logical Framework Analysis
LLM Local Level Monitoring
LMCs Livestock Marketing Committees
LUP Land Use Planning
M&E Monitoring and Evaluation
MAWF Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Forestry
MDG Millennium Development Goal
MET Ministry of Environment and Tourism
MF Minister’s Forum
MFMR Ministry of Fisheries and Marine Resources
MGECW Ministry of Gender Equality and Child Welfare
MLR Ministry of Lands and Resettlement
MME Ministry of Mines and Energy
MOF Ministry of Finance
MRLGHRD Ministry of Regional and Local Government and Housing and Rural Development
NAP National Action Programme
19

--- Page 20 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
NAPCOD Namibia Programme to Combat Desertification
NACSO Namibia Association of CBNRM Support Organisations
NAU Namibia Agricultural Union
NDP National Development Plan
NDT Namibia Development Trust
NGOs Non-Governmental Organisations
NNF Namibia Nature Foundation
NNFU Namibia National Farmers Union
NNDFN Nyae Nyae Development Foundation of Namibia
NPC National Planning Commission
OROI One Region One Initiative
NSA Namibia Statistics Agency
PCU Programme Coordination Unit
PESILUP Promoting Environmental Sustainability through Improved Land Use Planning
PON Polytechnic of Namibia
RDCC Regional Development Coordination Committees
RDCs Regional Development Committees
REMUs Regional Emergency Management Units
SDAC Sustainable Development Advisory Council
SDI Sustainable Development Index
SLM Sustainable Land Management
SLM-SAM Sustainable Land Management and Adaptive Management
SPAN Strengthening the Protected Area Network
UNCCD United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification
20

--- Page 21 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
1. Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought –
A critical threat to national development in Namibia
1.1 Background
Figure 1: Average annual rainfall (l) and average plant production in Namibia (Source: Mendelsohn et al 2006).
Namibia is the driest country in sub-Saharan Africa, with a mean precipitation rate of less than 250mm
per year. Namibia’s physical environment presents serious challenges in terms of desertification,
land degradation and drought (DLDD). It is a vast, sparsely populated country comprising an area
of some 823,680 km2.
The climate is highly variable and unpredictable, and is typified by great temporal and spatial
variability in rainfall patterns. About 8% of the country falls within the dry sub-humid belt, while
the rest of the country is characterized by semi-arid through arid to hyper-arid conditions, the
latter being predominant in the west and south. High temperatures lead to high evaporation rates
resulting in a net water deficit. Namibia’s only perennial rivers are on its southern and northern
borders, and all have their sources in neighbouring countries.
The causes and impacts of DLDD are likely to be exacerbated through anthropogenic climate
change. Although a small contributor to greenhouse gas emissions, the agriculture and tourism
sectors are particularly vulnerable to the impacts from climate change associated with increasing
temperatures, increased number of drought and flood events, and even greater rainfall variability.
Faced with these challenges, Namibia ratified each of the Rio Conventions on climate change,
desertification, and biodiversity and has actively implemented the provisions of each of these
Conventions at the national level.
21

--- Page 22 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
1.2 Status of Land Degradation
Land degradation is a serious and increasing problem in Namibia. There are three main types
of land degradation namely: I. Vegetation Degradation, a category that includes rangeland
degradation, deforestation and degradation of dry forests and woodlands, II. Soil Degradation, a
category that includes wind and water induced erosion of soils and the loss of soil fertility, and III.
Water Degradation, which refers to the negative effect on water quantity and quality caused by
unsustainable water resources management and changes in ecosystem function linked to DLDD.
Figure 2: Namibia is the classic example of an arid country in which agricultural potential is limited by infertile
soils, variable rainfall and high temperatures (map on left shows soil suitability for crop cultivation). Nevertheless
agriculture and livestock production is practised on around 71% of the land (r) which makes the country highly
vulnerable to desertification (Source: Mendelsohn (2006)).
Livestock production, including small-stock farming and cattle ranching, is undertaken on
approximately 70% of Namibia’s landmass. Much of this rangeland is highly vulnerable to land
degradation, given the inherent infertility of the soil and the low levels and high variable nature
of rainfall.
Crop cultivation is focused in the northern communal areas, where approximately 10% of the
land surface supports approximately 50% of the population. Crop cultivation in the form of mixed
subsistence agriculture is the main land use in these areas, which have been identified as a main
high-risk area for desertification.
The Drought Investigation Committee came to the conclusion that rangeland degradation and soil
22

--- Page 23 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
erosion had started in Namibia as long ago as 1924. Declines in carrying capacity of Namibia’s
rangelands are estimated to be as high as 100% or more and that bush encroachment alone is
contributing to an economic loss to farmers in excess of about N$700 million per annum (MET, 2005;
CBEND, 2009). Soil productivity is also considered to be declining in the crop-growing northern
communal areas, but there is little systematic scientific monitoring of this.
1.3 Causes of Desertification and Land Degradation
Although desertification and land degradation in Namibia are caused mainly by inappropriate land
uses and agricultural practices, several structural root causes drive these inappropriate practices,
which need to be addressed through this National Action Programme and to inform the design of
remedial measures against land degradation.
Figure 3: The linkages and interconnections between human populations, poverty, development, poverty and other
economic activities on the environment, leading to degradation and desertification (Source: Vision 2030 Figure 3.7).
23

--- Page 24 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
1.3.1 High Levels of Poverty in the Rural Areas
Figure 4: Poor households, including severely poor, by region, in % of all households, 2003/04 (Source: NPC 2008).
Although Namibia is now classified as an upper middle income country, poverty and unemployment
levels are particularly high in the rural areas. The percentage of “poor individuals” in rural areas
was estimated at 49% compared to 17% for urban areas in 2004, while the 2009/10 National
Household Income and Expenditure Survey estimates that 34.5% of the rural population is poor
compared to only 4.9% in urban areas. The youth and women are also disproportionately affected
by unemployment, which is further exacerbated by lower levels of education, limited access
to safe drinking water and sanitation as well as other social problems such as HIV/AIDS. Poor
communities tend to rely directly on natural resources for their very survival, which can often lead
to the unsustainable use of land and natural resources.
1.3.2 Population Pressure
Even though Namibia is amongst the least populated countries in the world, there are localized
areas with high population densities and rapid population growth, such as the north-central regions
and marginal drylands adjacent to the Namib and Kalahari deserts. Increases in human populations
result in corresponding increases in demand for natural resources and place pressures on available
but limited resources such as land, wood, water, and grazing. Population expansion has also
rendered traditional agricultural methods either as no longer viable (as in the case of nomadic
pastoralism) or increasingly unsustainable (as in the case of slash and burn cultivation). Cultural
tendencies in livestock management also tend to resist recommendations on stocking levels in
response to droughts and deteriorating range conditions.
24

--- Page 25 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
Figure 5: Human population density (l) and cattle density (r) in Namibia (Source: Mendelsohn et al 2002).
1.3.3 Land Reform and Resettlement and Land Tenure
At independence, Namibia inherited a racially skewed land distribution pattern with about 43%
of the available agricultural land owned by some 4,500 mainly white commercial farmers, while
more than 150,000 households had access to only 42% of the land (Werner 1997). The Government
has sought to implement a commercial land reform programme to address this difficult legacy.
Approximately 139 farms were acquired from 2001 -2010, covering almost 976,000 hectares and
the resettlement of 2,537 people.
Harring and Odendaal (2002) argue that the Namibian government is yet to integrate environmental
considerations into its programme to resettle previously disadvantaged Namibians on Government-
purchased farms. In most cases, the purchased farms are carved up into smaller units, which are
not large enough to support sustainable and profitable farming enterprises. Post-resettlement
support is also an area of weakness, and resettlement farms tend to be characterized by extremely
poor veld conditions due to overgrazing or poor grazing management.
The lack of secure and exclusive group land tenure over grazing resources is a major constraint to
SLM in communal areas. The policies and legislation have given communities rights over wildlife,
forest resources and water, but not over the land itself. This prevents farmers from keeping others
off the land they might wish to manage sustainably (e.g. by resting it), prevents them from being
able to raise capital loans using the land as security, and makes it unattractive for investors to start
capital projects since the risk is high.
25

--- Page 26 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
1.3.4 Unsustainable Use of Water Resources
Despite its modest contribution to GDP, agriculture accounts for an estimated 66.4% of all water
used in Namibia, with crop irrigation alone accounting for almost 40% of all water use, and there
are plans for expansion. Namibia’s Third National Development Plan (NDP3) notes how water
productivity is lowest in the agriculture sector, with it adding value of just N$4.5 per m3 of water
used compared to a non-agricultural average of N$203.8 per m3. It was estimated that irrigation
schemes on communal land were making a negative contribution to GDP. In a country where water
is the key constraint to economic development, it is imperative that it is put to the best possible
use.
1.3.5 Inadequate Capacity
Inadequate capacity has been identified as a cause of desertification and land degradation at
systemic, institutional and individual levels, and is addressed throughout NAP3 as a cross-cutting
element.
Systemic capacity problems refer to policies, which provide the framework conditions for
government programmes and action programmes. In the case of Namibia, these are manifested
by policies that are not always supportive of each other and in some cases give perverse incentives
that may aggravate land degradation or inadvertently impede SLM. Policies in water management
and the absence until recently of a rangeland management policy and policy for conservation
agriculture are examples of this.
Institutional capacity mainly refers to the structures of both central and local governments created
to implement policies. In Namibia, institutional capacity issues seen as constraints to achieving SLM
include centralized planning by service ministries with little involvement of land managers. The
mandates for land management are spread among different government ministries, which do not
plan in an integrated way - a situation that often leads to duplicated or even conflicting efforts. This
is the underlying reason for the development of cross-sector collaborative structures emphasised
in this document.
Individual capacity problems manifest themselves in the form of low numbers of technically
qualified personnel, difficulty in retaining key staff where they are needed most, and limited
knowledge and technology for land management at the local level.
1.3.6 Inadequate Mechanism for Cross-Sectoral Collaboration on Sustainable
Land Management
The responsibility over land management is vested in many different institutions, which have not
harmonised their policies and interventions relating to SLM. As yet, there is no mechanism either to
26

--- Page 27 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
facilitate harmonisation or to encourage strong and functional cross-sector collaboration to promote
SLM. In addition, the capacity of communities to make informed management decisions are also
limited on even the most widespread land use, that is, livestock husbandry. Simple and practical
locally based decision-support systems such as the “Local Level Monitoring” tool were developed
under NAPCOD and CPP, providing information on important parameters such as rangeland condition,
bush densities, carrying capacity, livestock condition and rainfall. However these systems need to
be further rolled out and adopted and applied by communities.
1.3.7 Weak Financing Mechanisms for Sustainable Land Management
There are weak mechanisms in place to support dedicated SLM interventions at the community
level. This is compounded by inadequate access to markets, and an overall lack of incentives for
investment in improved land management practices, particularly on rural communal lands. The
lack of financial mechanisms also prevents the uptake of promising technologies and the ability of
rural communities to diversify their livelihoods and reduce their vulnerability to climate variability.
1.3.8 Inadequate Application of Technology for Dry Land Production
Namibia has yet to apply the most appropriate water use efficient agriculture and range
management systems. Examples such as rotational grazing to allow range recovery has not been
adequately tested and mainstreamed, and the use of water saving ‘drip irrigation techniques’ and
conservation agriculture approaches are not widespread.
1.3.9 Climate Change
Climate change adds a new dimension to the root causes of desertification and land degradation
listed above. Reid et al (2007) using a climate change model, predicted that Namibia’s climate will
become hotter and drier in the future, with more variability in rainfall and increased frequency of
drought events. These predicted changes will greatly threaten the livelihoods of rural populations
and the health of ecosystems across the country. In practical production terms, Reid et al (2007)
estimate that losses in agricultural productivity as a result of climate change could amount to
1.5- 3.5% of GDP per year. This would mainly affect the commercial production of livestock, which
currently dominates Namibia’s agricultural sector, and which heavily depends on rainfall sensitive
rangeland conditions (Midgley et al 2005).
In a recent climate change modelling based study on Namibia’s commercial agriculture which
is dominated by livestock husbandry, Brown (2009) worked on the potential effects on the
commercial farming sector, under future scenarios in precipitation and the associated economic
losses. The study suggests that production of livestock will be seriously constrained under climate
change unless adaptation mechanisms are put in place and further that under more arid conditions
in the central parts of Namibia, wildlife production could replace livestock farming since local
wildlife species are generally better than livestock under harsh environmental conditions.
The climate change scenarios predicted by these studies suggest that this National Action Programme
must promote the development and adoption of policies and management mechanisms that will
27

--- Page 28 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
enable adaptation to even harsher environmental conditions.
1.4 Manifestations and Impacts of Land Degradation in Namibia
The following manifestations of land degradation are most commonly found on both communal
and commercial lands in Namibia:
1.4.1 Overgrazed and Overstocked Land
Generally in the communal farming areas, overstocking and overgrazing have led to loss of ground
cover and land productivity as well as increased vulnerability to drought. This problem is particularly
acute in Northern Namibia, along the Okavango River, on the eastern floodplains in Zambezi and in
a number of other scattered places, typically around large settlements. In extreme cases, such as
around Ondangwa, stocking density exceeds carrying capacity by over 40%. Open access to land and
unsuitable distribution of watering points, including boreholes, is a major driver for overstocking.
Figure 6: Stocking density in carrying capacity in terms of kg/hectare in Namibia, showing areas that overstocked,
stocked close to carrying capacity and those with potential for more stock (Source: Mendelsohn 2002).
Inappropriate drought aid (particularly the expansion of poorly planned permanent water points
and fodder subsidies) contributed to overstocking, especially during drought periods when it was
warranted to reduce livestock numbers in order to relieve pressure on the land. Animal feed subsidies
28

--- Page 29 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
and development of emergency water points during droughts served as perverse incentives as they
enabled livestock owners to maintain their stocking levels even during droughts.
This situation improved with the advent of the National Drought Policy and Strategy in 1997, which
introduced incentives for destocking during dry spells. The 1997 policy provides for marketing
incentive schemes in the form of financial rewards to farmers for every head of livestock sold
up to a certain limit (Aribeb and Mosimane, 2011). This policy further commits the government
to investigate several additional schemes aimed at encouraging the reduction of livestock on
rangelands during disaster droughts. These include subsidies for livestock transportation to leased
emergency grazing and to abattoirs and quarantine camps.
1.4.2 Bush Encroached Land
Bush encroachment is believed to be a result of a number of complex interacting factors such
as overgrazing and reduced browsing in favour of cattle production, exclusion of veld fires, and
climatic and soil moisture conditions caused by prolonged droughts. It occurs predominantly on
commercial agricultural land in the central and eastern areas and only in localised parts of the
communal areas in the north. Overall, it is estimated that around 26 million hectares of land is
affected and economic losses incurred have been estimated to be up to N$ 700 million per year.
The phenomenon of bush encroachment is particularly prevalent in the central and eastern parts
of Otjozondjupa and Omaheke where intensive commercial cattle farming predominates – and
where the density of plants varies between 2,500 and 10,000 bushes per hectare, and hence is
considered “encroached”.
The main species causing the encroachment problem are Acacia mellifera (Black thorn),
Dichrostachys cineria (Sickle bush), Terminalia sericeae (Silver terminalia), Terminalia prunoides
(Purple-pod terminalia), Acacia erubescens (Blue thorn), Acacia reficiens (False umbrella thorn)
and Colophospermum mopane (de Klerk, 2004).
1.4.3 Deforested Land
Deforestation poses a serious threat to habitats, reducing capacity for carbon sequestration, as well
as hydrological and nutrient cycling functions. It is most prevalent in the North and North Central
regions and is due largely to unsustainable uses of trees to build houses and provide fuel, clearing
of land for dry-land cropping, and unsuitable fire management. It is estimated that wood is the
primary energy source for at least 60% of Namibia’s population. Several studies reveal that for
example in the Zambezi Region, 96% of all households use wood for fuel and 80% of all dwellings
are made from wood (Ashley and La Franchi 1997; Mendelsohn and Roberts 1997). These studies
however agree that land clearing for agricultural purposes account for most of the deforestation
experienced in Namibia. Deforestation, particularly if it occurs along rivers, impacts heavily on the
healthy functioning of wetland ecosystems and is a major cause of soil erosion, declining water
quality and flood control.
29

--- Page 30 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
Unmanaged fires are also a factor in deforestation. It is estimated that the total area burnt between
1996 and 2000 averaged 51% per year. According to the Monthly Burned Area Report of September
2012 (MAWF 2012), this devastating impact of unmanaged fires has not changed. It has been
established that excessive human induced fires expose the top soil and contribute to large losses of
organic matter and soil nutrients. This exposed soil is particularly susceptible to erosion.
In the woodlands of the north-central and north-eastern regions of Namibia, deforestation arising
from over-exploitation and conversion of woodlands to agricultural fields remain the main causes
of forest cover losses and the deforested areas tend to be subjected to overgrazing, injudicious use
of fires and unsustainable agricultural practices which tend to encourage degradation and loss of
agricultural production, besides the carbon emissions associated with loss of forest cover.
1.4.4 Soil Degradation
Soil degradation is considered an increasing problem, caused by erosion from wind and water,
and associated with declining fertility and loss of organic matter. However, soil health is not
systematically monitored throughout Namibia. Impoverished soils and cases of soil compaction have
been identified in northern Namibia due to dryland cropping over many years with limited nutrient
inputs or soil fertility management under subsistence agriculture and through unsuitable tillage
methods. Recent trials under the CPP Programme showed that minimum tillage methods coupled
with deep ploughs (rippers) which break sub-surface hard-pans actually improve percolation, food
development and crop yields.
1.4.5 Water Degradation
Water degradation refers to decreased water quantity and decreased water quality. Strong population
growth, rapid urbanisation and industrialisation and expanding national economic output all place
increasing demands on a resource already under stress and have the potential to jeopardize the
quality of the resource. Current land management practices are also leading to water degradation
through:
• Over-extraction of water through dams and boreholes
• Inappropriate irrigation management which can cause salinisation
• Lowering of water tables and dessication of springs through invader bush species.
30

--- Page 31 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
2. Building on a Solid Foundation – Policy Framework
for Sustainable Land Management and National
Programmes on Sustainable Land and Natural
Resources Management
Namibia has a comprehensive and sound policy framework in place for addressing issues of DLDD.
2.1 Vision 2030
Namibia’s long term planning framework of Vision 2030 recognizes land and its associated natural
resources as a vital component of Namibia’s development. The vision for the natural resource
sector states that Namibia shall develop its natural capital for the benefit of its social, economic
and ecological well-being, by adopting strategies that promote the sustainable, equitable and
efficient use of natural resources, maximising comparative advantages and reducing inappropriate
resource use practices. It further directs that land must be used in appropriate and equitable ways
to significantly contribute to food security at household and national levels and to support the
sustainable and equitable growth of Namibia’s economy, while maintaining and improving land
capability and ecosystem function.
2.2 National Development Plan 4
Namibia’s fourth National Development Plan (NDP4) is under implementation for the period 2012-
2017. Agriculture is identified as a priority focus area under NDP 4, which calls for a) 4% growth
in agriculture per year, b) increased household food security, c) large-scale development of agri-
business and agro-industrial sectors and d) increase in land carrying capacity. The ambitious targets
in agricultural development in an arid country imply that the country must be ready to understand
and tackle the environmental challenges of production - namely drought, water management and
land degradation, among others.
2.3 Land Management Policies and Practices to address Desertification,
Land Degradation and Drought
2.3.1 Agriculture Sector
The majority of land degradation processes are directly linked to agriculture and natural resource
use activities. In Namibia cultivation practices, soil fertility management, livestock densities,
irrigation methods, maintenance of forest cover and range management are key issues, which
have a bearing on land degradation.
31

--- Page 32 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
From a policy perspective, the Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Forestry (MAWF) has a mandate
to promote, develop, manage and utilise agriculture, water and forestry resources sustainably. A
number of policies address agricultural production in Namibia directly, while others do so indirectly.
The most prominent policies include:
• National Agricultural Policy (1995), currently under revision,
• National Drought Policy and Strategy (1997),
• Green Scheme Policy (2008), and the
• National Rangeland Management Policy and Strategy (2012).
The agricultural policy recognises its key tasks as:
i. Maximise broad-based participation
ii. Phase out subsidies that discourage private sector investment
iii. Facilitate independent marketing
iv. Encourage value addition
v. Integrate agriculture with other sectors
vi. Facilitate secure land tenure and
vii. Encourage drought preparedness.
While the Drought Policy and Strategy is acknowledged to be very thorough, forward thinking
and in line with SLM, the severe impacts of the 2013 drought have demonstrated that drought
preparedness was not adequate. Adaptive responses to droughts such as de-stocking or reduction
of livestock numbers continue to be hindered by cultural traditions and pricing policies among
others, and it is recommended to explore through NAP3 how to improve the implementation of
this policy and strategy.
There is an estimated 50,000 hectares of underdeveloped land along perennial rivers and in areas
with adequate underground water sources in Namibia. The Green Scheme, an initiative of the
MAWF, seeks to make use of these areas for increased agricultural production through irrigation.
The Scheme follows a Public-Private Partnership (PPP) approach to implementation. There is a
strong emphasis on social equity with most schemes open to small-scale communal farmers as
well as commercial investors, while adjacent rural communities are prioritised to benefit from
employment.
The National Rangeland Policy and Strategy of 2012 is currently under implementation through
a national task force and seeks to enable that rangelands are managed in such a way so that
productivity and biodiversity are restored and maintained. This is a key piece of legislation given
that rangelands cover approximately 70% of the Namibian landmass.
The challenges to production and the further development of the agricultural sector suggest a few
issues, which the sector ought to take into serious consideration from the perspective of SLM and
combating degradation and desertification.
32

--- Page 33 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
i. As an arid country, which according to climate change modelling, may experience even
greater moisture deficits, water saving technologies through innovative tillage, crop
improvement, judicious use of scarce water and choice of crops are an imperative.
ii. Rangeland management with a view to adapting to range conditions imposed by the
physical environment and responding in a consistent and concerted manner to prevailing
or predicted conditions should be mainstreamed particularly in the communal areas. In this
context, bush encroachment is a special phenomenon that must be addressed both in the
commercial and communal areas.
iii. An aggressive training programme in range management and dry land and irrigated crop
production aspects should enjoy a special status during the course of NDP4 and subsequent
development periods.
iv. The long term monitoring of climatic and ecological conditions should form part of Namibia’s
drought preparedness and early warning system, as these often directly affect agricultural
production. Fortunately agriculture already hosts a remote sensing facility which already
does fire mapping and whose mandate could be expanded to include general ecological
monitoring as a strategic information gathering tool.
v. The green scheme could be further enhanced with strong support from agricultural
economists so that the choice of crops and the technologies used to produce them should
ensure the best economic use of scarce water resources.
2.3.2 Water Sector
The relevant water policies include Water Supply and Sanitation Policy (WASSP, 1993), National
Water Policy White Paper (2000), Revised Water Supply and Sanitation Policy (WASSP 2008) and
the Water Resources Management Act (2004 and amended in 2013). In practice the Department
of Water Affairs (DWA), has created basin management committees (BMCs) which operate at the
level of catchments and bring together a number of stakeholders under the supervision of the
DWA. While the BMCs provide opportunities for cross-sector interactions, Local Authorities have had
difficulties recovering the costs of water supply, particularly in urban areas and a number of the
Local Authorities are in debt to the water supply authority – NamWater, largely because of tariff
levels that do not internalise the costs of water supply.
Based on the current issues on rural and urban water supply, some remedial issues could be
considered:
i. Basin Management Committees and Water Point Committees provide strategic and
opportunities to manage and protect water supply sources and should be further empowered
to improve their roles.
ii. There is an urgent need to create an authority - a Water Regulator under the Water Supply
and Sanitation Policy.
iii. Tariff systems for water by all local authorities should be reasonably standardised and
made to reflect the cost of water supply and reduce wastage, but with safeguards against
becoming unaffordable to poor people.
33

--- Page 34 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
iv. While the emergency water supply during extended dry seasons or exceptionally dry years
(emergency boreholes) makes economic and social sense, they should be carefully planned
and prohibited from becoming permanent as they tend to lead to localised overgrazing in
areas that are naturally suited to extensive grazing systems, which entails the movement
of livestock to allow range recovery.
v. Systematic production of water resource accounts to guide water resources use.
2.3.3 Forestry and Wildlife and Environment Sectors
The policies that regulate this cluster of sectors are the Forest Policy (2001), the Forest Act (2001),
Wildlife Management, Utilisation and Tourism in Communal Areas Policy (1995), CBNRM Policy
(1995 and 2012), Amendment to the Nature Conservation Ordinance (1996), and the Promotion
of Community Based Tourism Policy (1995). A policy on human-wildlife conflict was completed in
2009. In addition there is the Environmental Assessment Policy (1995) now strengthened by the
Environment Management Act (2007).
Within this cluster of sectors an example of relevant policy reforms is that of Community-based
Natural Resource Management, which allows for the devolution of tenure, rights and authority
over open-access common property resources to communities at the local-level. The policy makes
provision for group management and group accountability for stewardship of natural resources.
In the case of wildlife, forestry and commercial tourism, the rights are exclusive to the respective
community members, but this is not yet the case for rangelands. This policy has been implemented
to good effect in Namibia through the Conservancy and Community Forest programmes. Despite
the current focus on wildlife and forest management, conservancies and community forests offer
ideal local entry points for an integrated sustainable land management programme, since they
both lead to the formation of local institutions which have broader landscape level perspectives
than possible under family level farming units.
Despite the success with conservancies and community forests, some of the key challenges within
the wildlife and forestry sectors that are important from the perspective of SLM and degradation
are:
i. Finding alternatives to wood energy as a mechanism to reduce the overdependence on
wood for energy particularly in urban centres, a development, which tends to lead to
deforestation and degradation.
ii. Management and protection of forests and woodlands to maintain their structural and
spatial integrity.
iii. The balancing of wildlife management lands against those needed for cropping and livestock
is an important aspect, which recognises that traditional livelihood practices need not be
replaced by wildlife management. Hence ‘multiple use of lands’ and integrated systems
of land management are needed to cope with land scarcity and are also a mechanism for
adaptation to changing climates.
34

--- Page 35 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
iv. Mitigating human-wildlife conflict.
v. Strengthening the roles of Regional and Local Authorities as custodians of conservation and
managed natural spaces.
vi. Improving the coordination between sectors such as agriculture, forestry and wildlife and
offering coordinated extension services in agricultural and natural resource management to
achieve efficiencies in natural resource management.
2.3.4 Lands Sector
The policies relevant to this mandate are the National Land Policy (1998), National Resettlement
Policy (2001), Agricultural (Commercial) Land Reform Act (1995), Communal Land Act (2002) and
the Draft National Land Tenure Policy (in preparation since 2005).
The National Land Policy requires the Ministry of Lands and Resettlement (MLR) to implement
land use planning and oversee natural resource management and related issues. Communal
Land Boards have been set up and are operational to ensure that planning, land administration,
land development and environmental sustainability are promoted in communal areas. An inter-
ministerial Steering Committee is also in place to oversee Integrated Land Use Planning (SCIRLUP),
and Integrated Regional Land Use Plans were produced for the Hardap and //Karas regions.
In terms of resettlement farms, the MLR is considering a grant scheme to conduct both pre-
settlement orientation and provide concessionary start-up capital for resettled farmers. Without
accessible financial and technical support and without a functional partnership with MAWF to
improve the capacity of farmers to produce, it is unlikely that the challenges of land degradation
and the poverty associated with it can be comprehensively addressed. An unintended consequence
of insufficient support to resettled farmers is that some have no alternative but to sub-let their
farms.
On the issue of empowerment of local communities on land management issues, it is instructive
to look at what has happened in other sectors. In the water sector, Water Point Associations are
given ownership over boreholes and their management. Wildlife Conservancies and Community
Forests are also given proprietorship over wildlife and forests, including grazing rights within those
forest lands. The Communal Land Reform Act (CLRA) has not conferred control and ownership of
grazing lands outside conservancies and community forests to local communities. Such rights could
actually improve local control over rangeland management and help reduce improvident behaviour
(overstocking, unplanned and uncontrolled burning, illegal fencing) that often contribute to further
degradation of common grazing grounds.
The key issues that MLR needs to resolve and which are important to integrated sustainable land
management (ISLM) are:
35

--- Page 36 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
i. Speeding up the communal land registration process.
ii. Strengthening the capacity of Communal Land Boards and SCIRLUP for enhanced
environmental governance.
iii. Increasing the capacity and budget of MLR to support the resettlement process and generally
oversee planning and land care processes in conjunction with relevant ministries such as
MAWF, MET and MRLGHRD.
iv. Addressing the key question of rights over common grazing grounds and the supply of
water for livestock in an environmentally sustainable manner.
2.4 Learning from Previous Programmes on Land and Natural Resources
Management
Namibia has taken a proactive approach to combating desertification since the 1990s, and has been
implementing programmes on the ground since then. Various attempts have been implemented to
halt, and reverse, desertification in the context of the UNCCD, from which a wealth of experience
has been gained and is being used to inform NAP3.
2.4.1 Namibia’s Programme to Combat Desertification, 1994-2005 (NAPCOD)
Namibia started implementing NAPCOD some 3 years before UNCCD was formally established and
this initiative served as a de facto first NAP from 1994-2005.
This programme was framed with a strategic view on cross-sector collaboration; particularly
between the environment and agriculture sectors in Namibia. NAPCOD raised awareness about
causes and effects of land degradation, both on national and local level. It also generated improved
information about the location and rate of land degradation, as well as a national indicator-based
land degradation monitoring system.
36

--- Page 37 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
Figure 7: Land degradation risk map of 1997 (Source: Klintenberg and Seely)
Local-level activities were focused on three communities and included the establishment of Forums
for Integrated Resource Management (FIRMs) and the Local Level Monitoring (LLM) tool. These are
both products based on participatory approaches designed for used by resource managers at the
local level.
FIRMs were born out of the need for the communities to coordinate external development assistance
rendered to them by various service providers such as different government ministries/agencies,
NGOs and even donor agencies. Communities experienced excessive demands on their time from
these support agencies whose activities were not coordinated. This let to duplication of efforts and
also avoidable competition among some support agencies. The FIRM approach sought to reverse
this trend by placing communities in the driver’s seat. Through FIRM, CBOs and service providers
worked together in building capacity at community level through which they jointly identified and
addressed challenges to sustainable land management. This helped the communities to prioritise
effectively, made effective use of their time and resources, and minimised duplication of efforts.
The following achievements are attributed to the FIRM approach in the communities where NAPCOD
was implemented:
i. Greater ownership by communities over development processes.
ii. Clearer vision for future plans and their implementation at community level.
iii. Improved capacity to identify development priorities and solicit external support based on
agreed policies and procedures.
iv. Less duplication of services provision.
v. Less conflicting services provided.
37

--- Page 38 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
LLM is a tool used for improved decision-making based on monitoring of biophysical indicators that
farmers themselves identity. LLM under NAPCOD was designed to monitor five indicators: livestock
conditions, rainfall, rangeland conditions (especially grass), carrying capacity and bush density.
Farmers themselves were responsible for the monitoring using field guides developed with the
assistance from NAPCOD.
2.4.2 Country Pilot Partnership (CPP) Programme (2007-2012)
The CPP Programme was launched in 2007 as the umbrella for land degradation reversal in Namibia.
It was a partnership of 9 ministries which include the Ministry of Environment and Tourism, Ministry
of Agriculture, Water and Forestry, Ministry of Lands and Resettlements, Ministry of Regional and
Local Government and Housing and Rural Development, Ministry of Mines and Energy, National
Planning Commission, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Fisheries and Marine Resources, and Ministry
of Gender Equality and Child Welfare.
The CPP comprised a suite of interventions to address the underlying causes of land degradation in
Namibia. The goal of the Programme was to combat land degradation using integrated cross-sectoral
approaches which would enable Namibia to reach its MDG #7: “environmental sustainability” and,
to ensure the integrity of dry land ecosystems and ecosystem services. The objectives were:
a) to build and sustain capacity at systemic, institutional and individual level, ensuring cross-
sectoral and demand-driven coordination and implementation of sustainable land management
activities, and
b) to identify cost effective, innovative and appropriate SLM methods which integrate environmental,
social and economic objectives.
The programme embraced a programmatic approach, comprising linked projects such as Enhancing
Institutional and Human Resource Capacity through Local Level Coordination of Integrated Rangeland
Management and Support (CPP NAM CALLC), Adapting to Climate Change through the Improvement
of Traditional Crops and Livestock Farming (CPP NAM CCA), Support / Adaptive Management (CPP
NAM SLM SAM).
The CPP was fully endorsed by Government at all levels to align and integrate new SLM interventions.
Oversight and guidance was provided at four levels, namely, at the highest decision-making level
composed of Ministers in the Ministers Forum, Permanent Secretaries providing cross-sectoral
oversight in the Governing Body, at the Technical Coordination and at decentralised regional
steering committee levels. A summary of the CPP’s achievements are provided in the table below:
38

--- Page 39 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
SUMMARY OF KEY ACHIEVEMENTS OF CPP PROGRAMME
• Integrated sustainable land management activities were being practised in 37 pilot sites covering over
47,000 km2 and some 152,000 people. Through this at least 11 natural resource based enterprises with 62
full-time jobs and more than 250 part-time jobs and seasonal income generating activities were created.
• Unique partnership established between 9 ministries, civil society organisations, private sector, CBOs, and
academic institutions. This was aimed at facilitating cross-sectoral coordination.
• Through CPP’s Innovative Grants Mechanism small-scale innovative methods and models were piloted and
tested at local level. Under this, 23 community-based organizations were supported with over N$5 million to
implement livelihood-based activities, which are socially, economically and ecologically beneficial for local
people and their environment.
• Capacity building initiatives such as the Summer Landcare Programme, Young Professional Research
Associate (YPRA) and the Young Professional Intern Programme were undertaken in partnership with the
2 main Namibian institutions of tertiary education. Under the YPRA, 17 grants were awarded, resulting
in 5 PhD graduates and 12 Masters Degree graduates. Twenty one (21) young Namibians completed the
Summer Land Care Programme training course under the Desert Research Foundation of Namibia and
Gobabeb Training and Research Centre, while over 100 practitioners benefitted from applied field research
at the Polytechnic of Namibia and the University of Namibia.
• A number of best practice activities were identified, piloted and upscaled: Olushandja Horticultural
Association in the Omusati Region which made use of conservation and drip irrigation agriculture; guinea
fowl rearing projects in Ohangwena Region; distribution and testing of improved goat breeds; manufacture
and distribution of plastic granaries; and the production and subsidised sale of energy-saving Esy stoves.
• Support to 2 resettlement farms in Omaheke and Kunene regions with SLM activities. Through this initiative
336 resettled farmers on 6,000 ha were supported.
• A climate change community adaptation toolkit was produced and distributed to communities in the north-
central regions. A manual for the sustainable management of communal rangelands has also been produced
for dissemination to local farmers.
Table 1: Achievements of the CPP Programme (Source: MET, 2013).
2.4.3 Namibia’s Community Based Natural Resources Management
Programme (CBNRM)
The community based natural resources management programme (CBNRM) in Namibia was
launched as a national programme in 1993 as a collaborative effort between the Government of
Namibia and the United States Agency for International Development (USAID), which created the
WWF LIFE Programme as the implementation agency in conjunction with local non-governmental
organisations. The project emerged from one of the most significant policy shifts ever seen
in Namibia with respect to wildlife management. This was simply a landmark decision by the
government of a newly independent Namibia to devolve rights to local communities to manage
and directly benefit from wildlife resources on their lands; a situation which until then, had been
the preserve of the government and a minority commercial farming class in the pre-independence
era.
39

--- Page 40 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
Figure 8: Map Registered Conservancies 2013 Source: www.nacso.org.na)
By 2009, a total of 55 communal conservancies had been registered of which the first lot were
registered in 1998. By 2013, the number had reached 79, four were awaiting registration and
an additional 14 are in the making. At current rates and with the limits imposed by availability
of communal land, CBNRM pundits have suggested that a maximum number of 100 registered
conservancies appears to be the limit. Closely related to the wildlife conservancies in Namibia are
Community Forests, which were enabled by Namibia’s Forest Act of 2001 and by 2013, the number
of registered community forests stood at 32 and requests for new registrations were pending.
What is significant about these developments is that by 2013, the area under conservancies and
community forests constitutes a formidable 19% of Namibia’s total land surface; a fact that is
important in any sustainable land programme and any national efforts to combat desertification.
From a sustainable land management and desertification perspective, wildlife conservancies
and community forests are quite relevant because they both require the management of land to
support wildlife habitats, create linkages with protected areas, provide a variety of wood and non-
wood products and enable harvesting of both game and forest products on a sustainable basis. In
40

--- Page 41 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
addition, the areas under management are much larger than individual farming units, particularly
in Namibia’s communal areas and this enables the sustainable management of land at scales that
make ecological sense and facilitates the functioning of ecological processes. They are also suitable
for facilitating large scale adoption of improved management practices since a large number of
people, functioning through formal committees are involved in their management. The table below
is a verbatim extract from the Namibian Association for CBNRM Support Organisation’s (NACSO)
2012 annual report, which aptly illustrates the contributions of this sector towards sustainable
natural resources management and improvements of rural livelihoods.
AT THE END OF 2012 THERE WERE:
• 77 registered conservancies
• 1 community conservation association in a national park
• 13 registered community forests
• 66 community rangeland management areas, and
• 3 community fish reserves in the communal areas of Namibia
COMMUNITY CONSERVATION FACTS:
• Covers over 159,755 km2, which is about 52.2% of all communal land with about 172,000 residents
• Conservancies manage 158,247 km2, which is about 19.2% of Namibia
• Community forests cover 4,385 km2, much of it overlapping with conservancies
• Community rangeland management areas cover 4,004 km2, much of it overlapping with conservancies
• From the beginning of 1991 to the end of 2012, community conservation contributed about N$ 2.9 billion to
Namibia’s net national income
• During 2012, community conservation generated over N$ 58.3 million for local communities
• Community conservation facilitated 6,477 jobs in 2012
• 55 conservancies had a total of 99 enterprises based on natural resources in 2012
Table 2: Achievement of Namibia’s CBNRM at the end of 2012 (Source: NACSO 2012).
2.4.4 Bilateral and Multilateral Projects linked to Desertification, Land
Degradation and Drought
Namibia has been one of the most successful countries in Africa in attracting funding for and
executing land degradation-related projects through the Global Environment Facility (GEF) and
also benefits from excellent bilateral cooperation in the area of biodiversity management with a
number of countries. These projects typically play an important role in providing catalytic funding
for innovative interventions and will directly contribute to the implementation of NAP3. A list of
the most significant projects and their areas of intervention is below:
41

--- Page 42 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
NEW AND ONGOING PROJECTS ADDRESSING SUSTAINABLE LAND MANAGEMENT, DEGRADATION AND
DESERTIFICATION IN NAMIBIA
Project Title Project Objective UNCCD operational
objectives & outcomes
addressed
AGRICULTURE PROJECT Reduce rural poverty through investments that achieve a 2.1, 5.1,.5.5
OF THE MCA (2009- sustainable increase in the economic performance of the
2014) agricultural sector. Includes
(i) Land Access and Management; (ii) Livestock Support; and (iii)
Indigenous Natural Products (INP).
SAREP (2010-2015) Promote a trans-boundary approach to resource management 2
and climate resilience to preserve the Okavango basin and
provide sustainable and equitable development opportunities
for its inhabitants
TNC (2012-2015) To enhance Namibia’s capacity to better deal with climate 3.1, 3.2, 3.4
(GEF) change risks and create opportunities at individual, institutional
and systemic levels.
BMCC Project i. Capacity development for community-based natural 2, 3, 4
resource management in a changing climate in selected
(2013-2020 – MET/
pilot regions
GIZ)
ii. Cross-sectoral mainstreaming of biodiversity, adaptation
to climate change and a green economy
PASS Project (2014- Strengthen the Protected Area system of Namibia and ensure 5.1, 5.2, 5.4
2019) (GEF) sustainable finance through improving current systems for
revenue generation, introduction of innovative revenue
generation mechanisms; and cost effective enforcement through
application of the Enforcement Economics Model
NAFOLA (2014-2019) To maintain current dry forests and the ecosystem goods and 3.1, 3.2, 3.4
(GEF) services they provide, in over 500,000 ha of forest lands,
through wide-scale adoption of SLM, SFM and other improved
technologies.
SCORE (2014-2019) Strengthen adaptive capacity and reduce the vulnerability of 3.1, 5
(GEF) 4,000 households, 80% of which are female-headed and 75
schools, to droughts and floods in Northern Namibia by scaling
up climate-smart livelihoods.
Kalahari Namib Support communities and policy makers in Botswana, Namibia 2.1, 2.3,
Project (2014-2018) and South Africa to effectively implement and upscale SLM in
the Molopo-Nossob catchment area and thereby contribute
to restoration of the integrity and functioning of the entire
Kalahari-Namib ecosystem.
Table 3: New and ongoing projects addressing SLM and UNCCD objectives in Namibia.
42

--- Page 43 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
2.4.5 Funding Mechanisms for Sustainable Land Management in Namibia
Namibia has two functional conservation or environmental trust funds as well as a bank dedicated to
agricultural development in Namibia – the Agricultural Bank of Namibia. The Game Products Trust Fund
(GPTF) supports conservation across Namibia, particularly community-based conservation initiatives
or programmes. The Environmental Investment Fund (EIF), which was officially launched in 2012, is
an innovative financing mechanism for the environment, in line with other environmental funds in
Africa and elsewhere. It raises funds locally and its sources range from grants to environmental levies
on consumer products, which have a direct or indirect bearing on the environment through some
form of emissions or environmental ‘footprint’. The EIF programme areas encompass conservancies,
land use planning, renewable energy, waste management, pesticide use, green technology, research
and awareness. This programme portfolio makes it a natural partner to any process in Namibia to
promote sustainable land management and combat desertification.
It is noteworthy that the adverse economic impact of bush encroachment on livestock production
has also been recognised in the financial sector. As a result, the First National Bank of Namibia and
the state-owned Agricultural Bank of Namibia introduced loan products for de-bushing for freehold
farmers in 2014.
2.5 Key Lessons Learned
Namibia’s pursuit of sustainable land and natural resources has delivered a number of key lessons
learned, which will be further built on through this Third National Action Programme:
i. A variety of good practices in the area of sustainable land management suited to Namibia’s
variable environment have been identified through previous National Action Programmes
and other interventions including:
• The use of water efficient practices in agriculture, particularly drip irrigation, which
has been tested mainly in the Omusati Region in northern Namibia.
• The establishment of Livestock Marketing Committees in rural areas with a view
to use improved marketing and access to markets as an incentive to improve the
management of livestock and instill a more positive attitude to de-stocking during
drought.
• Community-Based Rangeland and Livestock Management - this aimed to enhance
perennial grasses and overall rangeland conditions through rotational grazing, mi-
nimising animal impact and herding of livestock. This was particularly practised
through the CPP Programme in north-west Namibia and through the Millennium
Challenge Account.
• Improved livestock productivity and ecosystem health has been achieved with the
introduction of indigenous and hybrid breeds of livestock. This area requires further
research and support.
• Small and medium enterprises have been developed linked to the sustainable use
43

--- Page 44 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
of and value addition to natural resources. However the marketing of farm and veld
products needs to be an integral part of programme planning. It is not enough to
improve production capacity and techniques of communities; value addition and
development of the value chain for products requires equal attention and support.
• Individual Capacity Building - a number of post graduate scholarships were offered
to students in various aspects of SLM
ii. The wise management of Namibia’s land and natural resources is dependent on the
ability of land users to derive benefits therefrom. This has been demonstrated through
the CBNRM Programme, which has put incentives in place for the conservation of wildlife.
Similar incentives should be put in place for land users and communities to benefit fair and
equitably from value addition to their natural resources and the sale of livestock.
iii. There are good opportunities for empowering women in the area of sustainable
land management. The increased use of participatory approaches in the design and
implementation of activities (such as Community Visioning exercises) is opening up
opportunities for women to become centrally involved in these activities. Women are
also increasingly represented on devolved management structures such as conservancy
committees, HIV/AIDS committees, FIRMs, water point committees and other CBOs. It
is strongly recommended for interventions under this National Action Programme to be
gender sensitive and enable the full empowerment of women.
iv. Namibia has in place a relatively comprehensive policy framework for sustainable land
management. NAP3 must dedicate itself to the effective implementation of this framework,
especially through improved sectoral coordination. Until now, coordination arrangements
for sustainable land management have been temporary mechanisms (NAPCOD and CPP
programmes). NAP3 must put a permanent institutional structure in place to ensure its
effective implementation.
v. Namibia has considerable experience, through the Innovative Grants Mechanism, Small
Grants Programme and Environmental Investment Fund, in supporting the development
of community-based Small and Medium Enterprises. Scaling up best practices requires
concerted efforts within government departments and as an example it was recommended
that a SME Financial Facility within an existing bank could be a useful mechanisms to finance
adoption of best practices should be set up. This however requires innovative marketing to
convince conservative financial institutions to support small farmers and equally innovative
ways to encourage farmers to adopt business principles in farming.
vi. Capacity building continues to be required at the systemic, institutional and individual levels.
vii. Inadequate implementation mechanisms and monitoring systems have been identified as
the main weakness in terms of the SLM policy framework. More emphasis should be directed
towards strengthening systemic and institutional capacities to effectively implement
policies and deliver services in a more coordinated and cross-sectoral approach.
44

--- Page 45 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
3. Implementing International Best Practices
and Developments at Home
A number of developments at the international level have given increased importance to issues
of DLDD. Namibia has followed closely these developments, which have also served to shape and
inform NAP3. The key developments are noted in the following sections.
3.1 The Adoption of the Global UNCCD Strategy (2008-2018)
In 2007, the UNCCD adopted a 10-Year Strategy (2008-2018) to enhance implementation of
the Convention with an overall objective “to forge a global partnership to reverse and prevent
desertification/land degradation and to mitigate the effects of drought in affected areas in order
to support poverty reduction and environmental sustainability”.
The Strategy contains four strategic objectives, as well as five operational objectives. The four
strategic objectives are:
i. To improve the living conditions of affected populations
ii. To improve the condition of affected ecosystems
iii. To generate global benefits through effective implementation of the UNCCD
iv. To mobilize resources to support implementation of the Convention through building
effective partnerships between national and international actors
The five operational objectives are each linked to thematic areas as portrayed in the table below:
Operational Objective Thematic Area
To actively influence relevant international, national and local Advocacy, awareness raising and education
processes and actors in adequately addressing desertification/land
degradation and drought-related issues.
To support the creation of enabling environments for promoting Policy framework
solutions to combat desertification / land degradation and mitigate
the effects of drought.
To become a global authority on scientific and technical knowledge Science, technology and knowledge
pertaining to desertification / land degradation and mitigation of
the effects of drought.
45

--- Page 46 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
To identify and address capacity-building needs to prevent and Capacity building
reverse desertification / land degradation and mitigate the effects
of drought.
To mobilise and improve the targeting and coordination of national, Financing and technology transfer
bilateral and multilateral financial and technological resources in
order to increase their impact and effectiveness.
Table 4: Summary of operational objectives of the UNCCD Global Strategy.
3.2 Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought post Rio+20 Summit
The Future We Want Outcome Document from the Rio+20 Summit in 2012 resolved to strengthen the
UNCCD and called for urgent action to reverse land degradation and to achieve a land degradation
neutral world.
It recognised the need for urgent action to reverse land degradation and the achievement of a
land degradation neutral world in the context of sustainable development. The document also
resolves to support and strengthen the implementation of the UNCCD, and to take coordinated
action (nationally, regionally and internationally) in accordance with the UNCCD to monitor globally
land degradation and restore degraded lands in arid, semi-arid and dry sub-humid areas.
The Future We Want further stressed the importance of the further development and implementation
of scientifically based, sound and socially inclusive methods and indicators for monitoring and
assessing the extent of desertification, land degradation and drought, as well as the importance of
efforts under way to promote scientific research and strengthen the scientific base of activities to
address desertification and drought in accordance with the UNCCD.
Namibia embraces each of these outcomes from the Rio+20 Summit, in particular to achieve Land
Degradation Neutrality and to ensure Zero Net Land Degradation by 2030 as a prerequisite for
assuring water, food and energy security, alleviating poverty and to adapt to the impacts of climate
change.
In follow up to Rio+20, DLDD has also been included in the post-2015 sustainable development
goals, which highlights the importance of tackling DLDD at both the national and global levels.
3.3 The Namib Declaration from UNCCD COP11 in Windhoek
Decision 36 from UNCCD COP 11 in 2013 adopted the Namib Declaration, which sets out Namibia’s
vision for strengthening the implementation of the UNCCD at national and global levels. It includes
46

--- Page 47 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
the following elements:
1. Strengthening UNCCD leadership for the future we want
2. Addressing drought mitigation as a matter of priority
3. Advancing the science-policy interface
4. Focusing on local Communities
5. Engaging with the private sector
6. Empowering women in SLM
This Third National Action Programme seeks to give effect to the Namib declaration and the above
elements are strongly reflected in the framework of the National Action Programme in section 4.
3.4 Relevant African Union Decisions
Given the special significance of the UNCCD to African countries, there is strong political will for
Africa to show leadership in its implementation. This is evidenced by a number of recent decisions.
Decision 479 from the 21st Ordinary Session of the AU Summit from 25-26th May
2013 on the need to strengthen African leadership in the UNCCD process, urged
Member States to place desertification, land degradation and drought related issues at the centre
of the debate on the Post-2015 Development Agenda, and recognize it as one of the sustainable
development goals, particularly the concept of Zero Net Land Degradation.
Decision 492 of the 22nd Ordinary Session of the AU Summit from 30-31 January 2014 contains a
number of pertinent resolutions including:
i. Renewing its commitment to the Namib Declaration
ii. Endorsing the establishment of an African working group on desertification and sustainable
land management
iii. Requesting the Commission to review the African coordination mechanism in place in order
to strengthen it and to improve Africa’s engagement in UNCCD processes
3.5 Promoting Synergies with National Instruments to implement
the United Nations Conventions on Climate Change (UNFCCC)
and Biodiversity (CBD)
DLDD issues are closely linked to the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity as well as
climate change adaptation and mitigation in Namibia, especially because of its severe aridity.
47

--- Page 48 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
The need for synergies is therefore highlighted here as well as in Namibia’s Second National
Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan (2013-2022) and the National Climate Change Strategy and
Action Plan (2013-2020).
DLDD are key drivers of biodiversity loss and with climate change set to lead to increased rainfall
variability and instances of extreme events, the threat to ecosystems and species diversity is
increasing and requires coordinated action. Agriculture, including livestock and crop farming, is a
particularly vulnerable sector to climate change. With rangelands for cattle ranching and small-
stock farming covering approximately 71% of Namibia’s land area (Mendelsohn 2006), their wise
management is particularly important for biodiversity conservation.
Unsustainable land management practices have been identified as one of the major threats to
biodiversity, and need to be eliminated so that land maintains its productivity and ecosystem
breakdown and species loss is avoided over the long-term. This is likely to be best achieved through
the ecosystem approach to adaptation, which includes the sustainable management, conservation
and restoration of ecosystems to provide services that help people adapt to the adverse effects of
climate change.
Given the heavy dependence of rural communities on wood for cooking and lighting needs, the
dissemination of solar energy infrastructure and fuel efficient technologies such as the Ezy-Stove
cooker are important climate change mitigation strategies, which will also contribute to reduced
deforestation and maintenance of ecosystem integrity.
Further synergies will be explored in the areas of advocacy, awareness and education as well as
science, research and technology and capacity development.
48

--- Page 49 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
4. Framework of the Third National Action Programme
to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation
and Drought
4.1 Methodology
The following key activities formed the basis of the methodology to develop Namibia’s Third
National Action Programme:
i. Desktop review of relevant documentation linked to sustainable land management with
particular focus on key processes and programmes that Namibia has put in place to address
land degradation and desertification and the identification and description of key gaps or
weaknesses which should be addressed
ii. Identification of draft priority intervention areas
iii. National Workshop to work through draft priority intervention areas and to assess alignment
with the UNCCD Strategy (2008-2018)
iv. High level meetings between MET and MAWF and MET and MLR to receive further inputs
into the draft NAP3 and to strengthen political will and commitment
v. Revision of draft NAP3 based on comments and inputs received from high level meetings
vi. Final National Workshop to present NAP3 for final inputs on interventions as well as the
proposed institutional arrangements for implementation
vii. Peer Review of final draft document through national and international experts
viii. Approval of NAP3 by Cabinet
4.2 Objective of NAP3
NAP3 has the following objective:
“To prevent and reverse desertification and land degradation in affected areas and mitigate the
effects of drought in Namibia in support of poverty reduction and environmental sustainability”.
4.3 Key Outcomes of NAP3
NAP3 contains six main desired outcomes, which cover the themes of advocacy awareness and
education; policy and institutional framework for DLDD; monitoring system for DLDD; on-the-ground
49

--- Page 50 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
action to prevent and reverse land degradation; financial support; and research and development.
The outcomes are as follows:
i. By 2018, information on the risks Namibia faces and the need to combat desertification at a
national scale is produced, made easily accessible and actually used by policy-makers, land
managers, research and educational institutions.
ii. Policy and institutional frameworks are effectively implemented and strengthened to
address desertification, land degradation and drought by 2024.
iii. A functional DLDD Monitoring System and supportive processes are in place by 2018 for
Namibia to move towards land degradation neutrality.
iv. Degradation and desertification processes in Focal Landscapes are halted and reversed by
2024, and affected communities and ecosystems strengthened to mitigate the impacts of
drought.
v. Financial lending and grant making facilities are in place and supporting communities and
small farmers to implement sustainable land management by 2017.
vi. Research on aspects of sustainable land management and climate change science in
support of adaptation and mitigation are mainstreamed in research and tertiary educational
institutions and extension services by 2020.
4.4 Key Outputs per Outcomes
4.4.1 Outcome 1: By 2018 information on the risks Namibia faces and the
need to combat desertification at a national scale is produced, made
easily accessible and actually used by policy makers, land managers,
research and educational institutions.
This objective of this outcome is to actively influence relevant international, national and local
processes and actors in adequately addressing DLDD issues.
In the area of advocacy, awareness and education, and given its aridity, the MET will advocate
the promotion of SLM to tackle DLDD and raise the awareness of the public on the long-term
dangers of unsustainable land management and options for effective climate change mitigation
and adaptation. These issues should not only be in the curricula of schools and training institutions
but must be made available to the general public through multi-media and information and
communication technology campaigns.
Policy makers, land managers, research and educational institutions will be the main target
audiences for advocacy, awareness and education on SLM. Namibia will continue to share its
experiences in combating DLDD through the UNCCD and regional fora.
50

--- Page 51 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
Outputs relevant to Outcome 1
i. Policy advocacy papers on DLDD produced and publicised, and gender-based dimensions
mainstreamed into all DLDD-related programmes and policy issues.
ii. Annual DLDD newsletter distributed to all educational and research institutions in Namibia.
iii. Reports on the management, rehabilitation and recovery of focal landscapes.
iv. Information from the DLDD Monitoring System publicised, distributed, and discussed in
public fora.
v. Publication of climate change scenarios and risks for Namibia and their implications on local
adaptation needs.
4.4.2 Outcome 2: Policy and institutional frameworks are effectively
implemented and strengthened to address desertification, land
degradation and drought by 2024
The objective of this outcome is to support the creation of an enabling environment to promote
solutions to combating DLDD.
Namibia has in place a relatively comprehensive policy framework for SLM. The focus of this
outcome is the effective implementation of this framework, especially through improved sectoral
coordination. Until now, coordination arrangements for SLM have been temporary mechanisms
(NAPCOD and CPP programmes). NAP3 will put a permanent institutional structure in place to ensure
the effective implementation of NAP3 and SLM in Namibia and to promote the use of incentives
to foster better land husbandry, technology adoption and to achieve cross-sector collaboration.
The strengthening of local governance structures linked to SLM is also a vital component of this
outcome.
Outputs relevant to Outcome 2
i. Permanent institutional structure in place to further cross-sector collaboration on
implementation of SLM programmes and initiatives for combating desertification.
ii. Integration of NAP3 and broader promotion of sustainable land management into Namibia’s
5th National Development Plan (2018-2023).
iii. Local level governance structures linked to sustainable land management further
strengthened and empowered – such as conservancy committees, community forests,
communal land boards, basin management committees, water point associations, livestock
marketing committees etc.
iv. Critical review undertaken of implementation of the National Drought Management Policy
and Strategy (1997).
51

--- Page 52 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
4.4.3 Outcome 3: A functional DLDD Monitoring System and supportive
processes are in place by 2018 for Namibia to move towards land
degradation neutrality
The overall objective of this outcome is to establish a functional DLDD monitoring system to facilitate
Namibia’s national level implementation of the Land Degradation Neutrality concept.
It has been observed that there is a lack of rigorous long term scientific monitoring and measurement
of land degradation and its different manifestations. There is thus limited knowledge of the current
extent and trends of land degradation in the country, with different variables of land degradation
being measured by different institutions with limited collaboration, and other important variables
such as soil health not being systematically monitored. The effectiveness of Namibia’s Early Warning
Systems for drought has also been called into question by the impacts of the drought of 2013. The
DLDD monitoring will seek to bring together these different elements in a comprehensive GIS-
based system, which can also inform the regional and global levels of DLDD trends in Namibia.
Outputs relevant to Outcome 3
i. Institutional collaborative structure in place to collect data and information on DLDD and
the health of land in Namibia – including variables such as soil moisture, soil fertility, forest
cover changes, rangelands, crop yields, livestock productivity, temperature, rainfall, and
flooding patterns.
ii. Target setting and implementation of the Land Degradation Neutrality concept at national
level.
iii. An information gathering protocol and a functional database for storage and retrieval of
data and information on the state and degradation of land and its natural resources.
iv. A shared GIS-Internet Platform (database) for stakeholders to upload and share data and
information, administered by a central designated authority.
v. Publication of and access to data on trends in thematic areas (forest cover, bush
encroachment, range conditions, droughts, floods) – and interpretation of the trends in
actionable terms.
4.4.4 Outcome 4: Desertification and land degradation processes in
Focal Landscapes are halted and reversed by 2024, and affected
communities and ecosystems strengthened to mitigate the impacts
of drought
The objective of this outcome is to address issues of DLDD in a manner that is feasible and at scales
that will yield both national and global benefits. At least five ‘Focal Landscapes’ will be identified
to promote land management practices that are consistent with its policies and those articulated
under UNCCD - based on local experiences from NAPCOD, CPP and other past initiatives as well as
52

--- Page 53 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
from global best practice. The focal landscapes will showcase Namibia’s practical on-the-ground
efforts to combat DLDD and promote SLM. As such, they will need to be characterised in both bio-
physical and socio-economic terms, to provide baseline data and information against which the
success of management interventions will be monitored and evaluated.
For purposes of this document, an operational definition of a landscape is a large area of land on
which a number of land uses are operational and in which the land and its natural resources are in
various stages of degradation. With respect to Namibia such a landscape may contain some or all
of the following features:
i. Communal farm land which is under cultivation – this could be a mixture of rain-fed and
irrigated cropping but with land degradation challenges.
ii. Pastures and woodlands which are not under any formal management plans – also with
ongoing degradation processes.
iii. Resettlement Farm.
iv. Presence of a community based wildlife conservancy or a community forest.
v. A strategic wildlife corridor which is not gazetted but under multiple use – with threats of
degradation.
vi. An area which is under ‘bush encroachment’.
vii. An area adjoining or contiguous with a formally protected area.
Outputs relevant to Outcome 4
i. At least 5 focal landscapes in Namibia are identified for best practice SLM and rehabilitation,
representing a mixture of land uses and including at least one bush encroached site.
ii. Publication of baseline environmental and socio-economic data for each focal landscape to
aid and guide future monitoring. This will include comprehensive vulnerability assessment
reports, particularly with regard to climate change.
iii. Upscaling of best SLM practices within and around focal landscapes (drip irrigation, sustainable
basin-level water resources management, conservation agriculture, improved rangeland
management, community based conservation etc) for immediate implementation. This will
draw upon the achievements of past initiatives in Namibian namely the CPP and NAPCOD.
iv. Empowerment plans for women and vulnerable groups, linked to restoration programmes
in the focal landscapes.
v. Programmes to improve the structures and functions of local institutions (Conservancy and
Community Forestry Committees, Community-based Water Point Management, Integrated
Water Resources Management at basin level, Forums for Integrated Resource Management
or FIRMS, Livestock Marketing and Range Management Committees) who will be partners
in the management and restoration of the ‘Focal Landscapes’.
53

--- Page 54 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
vi. Research and publication of baseline land use and socio-economic data for each focal
landscape to aid and guide future monitoring. Empowerment plans for women and
vulnerable groups in the focal landscapes.
4.4.5 Outcome 5: Financial lending and grant making facilities are in
place and supporting communities and small farmers to implement
sustainable land management by 2017.
The objective of this outcome is to mobilize and improve the targeting and coordination of financial
resources from all sources for SLM to increase their impact and effectiveness, particularly at the
local level.
Namibia must continue to mobilise funds both multilaterally and bilaterally to upscale the good
practices identified through the NAPCOD and CPP Programmes, particularly to empower rural
populations and women who are most vulnerable to degradation induced poverty and ensure that
issues of biodiversity conservation and sustainable use practices are promoted.
With regard to innovative funding, Namibia already boasts of the Game Products Trust Fund, the
Environmental Investment Fund and the Agricultural Bank of Namibia. There is a clear need to
mainstream support to SLM interventions through specific windows within these funds.
Avenues to engage the private sector in financing also need to be explored including support from
commercial banks to interventions such as conservation agriculture and de-bushing, and insurance
companies to buffer the impacts from drought events.
Outputs relevant to Outcome 5
i. A competitive grants schemes for individual farmers and farmer associations or groups.
ii. Strategy on farmer support financing including low interest loans for SLM and improved
production technologies and practices.
iii. A forum for the promotion of financing of improved land and natural resources management
– led by an institution such as the Environmental Investment Fund or AgriBank.
iv. A dedicated government fund for multi-sector projects associated with SLM, in effect a
Statutory SLM Fund.
54

--- Page 55 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
4.4.6 Outcome 6: Research on aspects of sustainable land management
and climate change science in support of adaptation and mitigation
are mainstreamed in research and tertiary educational institutions
and extension services by 2020.
The objective of this outcome is to further research linked to SLM through tertiary institutions
and the MAWF and to promote the adoption of this research on-the-ground through extension
services and tertiary institutions. It is particularly linked to innovative technologies and practices
for SLM and climate change adaptation as well as the monitoring of DLDD issues and the different
manifestations of land degradation.
Namibia’s National Commission on Research, Science and Technology (NCRST), which was
established in 2012 to coordinate, monitor and supervise research, science and technology and to
provide policy guidance to the research, science and technology innovation systems in Namibia,
will have a key role to play in the achievement of this outcome.
Outputs relevant to Outcome 6
i. An assessment report on required capacities to implement a national programme to promote
SLM and combat desertification.
ii. A technical skills development plan to improve national capacity for research, monitoring
and implementation of SLM and anti-desertification programmes (Examples: climate
change modelling and scenario building, GIS and Remote Sensing, stress physiology in
crops, animal and plant breeding).
iii. A research plan to assess the sensitivity and response of Focal Landscapes to rehabilitation
programmes – (Research themes – climate change and stress tolerance in crops and
animals, water and nutrient efficiency in crops, climate induced movement of flora and
fauna, development of degradation indices, modelling economic aspects of degradation,
desertification and adoption of improved technologies).
iv. Training modules on climate change and SLM issues developed for inclusion into the curricula
of tertiary institutions of Namibia.
v. Institutional partnerships for research and training created and existing ones strengthened.
55

--- Page 56 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
5. Institutional Arrangements for Implementation
of NAP3
NAP3 will be implemented over a 10 year period from 2014-2024. The 10 year period is considered
realistic for Namibia to put the necessary structures in place to oversee and give effect to the
effective implementation of NAP3. It will also be an optimum time period to attract and implement
projects to fulfil the outcomes and outputs outlined in section 4.
5.1 Key Stakeholders for Implementation of NAP3
As focal point to the UNCCD, the Ministry of Environment and Tourism (MET), through the Department
of Environmental Affairs (DEA), will coordinate the elaboration of NAP3.
A National Sustainable Land Management Technical Committee will be established to oversee the
implementation of NAP3, including its monitoring and evaluation. The committee will also serve to
galvanise concerted and holistic action among government agencies and their partners on issues of
sustainable land management. The committee will follow the cross-sectoral coordination approach
utilised by NAPCOD and CPP and draw representatives from some of the institutions listed in the
table below:
PARTNERS FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMME
INSTITUTION / ORGANISATION SPECIFIC REMARKS
Ministry of Environment and Tourism The MET is the ministry with the mandate to promote sustainable
(MET) development and is also the national focal point to the Rio Conventions.
National Planning Commission (NPC) Is the highest planning authority which can mainstream policies on
combating DLDD and also allocate budgets.
Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Forest- Is the key ministry on land use and land management and key policies
ry (MAWF) such as those on Green Schemes, drought, bush encroachment and
others.
Ministry of Regional and Local Govern- Is an important partner to adopt national policies at local levels and help
ment and Housing and Rural Develop- mobilise local communities. MRLGHRD is also responsible for bringing
ment (MRLGHRD) development to the rural areas.
Ministry of Lands and Resettlement (MLR) Is a key partner in land use planning and land allocations for development
as well as for supporting resettlement partners.
Ministry of Gender Equality and Child Wel- The Ministry was one of the partners in the CPP and are important in
fare (MGECW) promoting women in development & environment.
Sustainable Development Advisory Coun- The SDAC is a newly constituted body to advise the Minister of Environment
cil (SDAC) and Tourism and has the potential to play a significant advocacy role
within and outside government.
56

--- Page 57 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
Community-based organisations (CBOs) Are already proven partners in the Community Based Natural Resources
Management Programme in Namibia.
Private sector The private sector is a valuable partner in financing value-added
manufacturing, tourism related enterprises, technology adoption and
marketing.
It is important that commercial farmers are also brough on board through
the Namibia Agricultural Union. Green Scheme operators are also
important stakeholders, as are private insurance companies, which need
to be mobilised in the area of drought mitigation.
Non-governmental Organisations/ Com- NGOs provide valuable support to rural development, conservation and
munity Support Organisations (NGOs/ nature based enterprises. They are also a powerful lobby for environment
CSOs) at all levels. In Namibia they are represented by organizations such as
NACSO, DRFN, IRDNC, NNF, WWF, NDT, Komeho and others.
National Commission on Research, Sci- The NCRST is responsible to coordinate, monitor and supervise research,
ence and Technology (NCRST) science and technology and to provide policy guidance to the research,
science and technology innovation systems in Namibia.
Academia UNAM and the Polytechnic of Namibia are particularly important to train
professional land and resource managers, conduct research and can
inculcate awareness on desertification and SLM in their students.
Namibia Statistics Agency The institution already collects socio-economic data and can be
instrumental to help organise data on environmental monitoring the
links between socio-economic and environmental trends.
Donor Agencies Donor agencies such as the GIZ and UNDP are particularly important
partners in the implementation of projects linked to sustainable land
management and natural resources management.
Table 5: List of national partners for the implementation of NAP3.
The Division of Multilateral Environmental Agreements from the Department of Environmental
Affairs will serve as Secretariat to the Committee, facilitate programme implementation at the
various project levels, communicate with and supervise project implementers and consultants,
and compile progress reports from the various project activities and condense these reports for
submission to appropriate authorities.
5.2 Monitoring and Evaluation of NAP3
The monitoring and evaluation of NAP3 will follow a practical approach and will be coordinated
through the Division of Multi-Lateral Environmental Agreements under the MET, with support from
57

--- Page 58 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
the cross-sectoral Sustainable Land Management Committee. All of the activities prioritised in
NAP3 are to be implemented by institutions represented on the Sustainable Land Management
Committee, which should facilitate the process of coordination, monitoring and evaluation.
It is envisaged that the different key institutions represented on the Sustainable Land Management
Committee will report back to the committee and high level stakeholders on an annual basis in
terms of their progress and challenges with regard to achieving the outcomes of NAP3. The MET
will take responsibility to compile these reports, which will provide a baseline on the status of
implementation, serve as a guide for future strategic planning, and contribute information towards
Namibia’s national reporting to the UNCCD in 2016, 2018, 2020, 2022 and 2024.
An independent mid-term evaluation of NAP3 will be undertaken in mid-2018. This will also provide
an assessment of Namibia’s contribution towards the UNCCD Strategy, which comes to an end in
2018. It is envisaged that the mid-term evaluation will also provide recommendations on possible
adjustments and amendments for the remaining period of NAP3, as well as the financial needs for
the remaining period. A final independent evaluation will be undertaken in 2024, which will also
provide lessons and direction for the development of a fourth NAP as appropriate.
5.3 Estimated 5-year Budget for National Action Programme of Namibia
The budget estimates listed here are for an initial 5-year period (2014 -2019), which will be
reviewed after a comprehensive assessment of needs for the remaining period of NAP3 based on
what has been achieved in the first five years. For the first 5-year period, the required total budget
is estimated at N$51.3 million, of which 63.5 % will be devoted to actual restoration and SLM
programmes in the five focal landscapes and 16.4 % on programme coordination, including the
monitoring and evaluation of NAP3. The table below provides a summary of the 5-year budget for
the National Action Programme.
OUTCOME OF THE NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMME 5-YEAR BUDGET IN NAMIBIA DOLLARS
1. Awareness creation and public participation 2,000,000
2. Policy & Institutional Framework 1,850,000
3. Environmental / ecological monitoring system 2,350,000
4. Work on 5 “Focal Landscapes” 33,000,000
5. Financial framework for SLM 1,300,000
6. Research and Education 2,300,000
7. Programme Coordination 8,500,000
8. TOTAL 5-YEAR COSTS 51,300,000
Table 6: Summary of estimated 5-year budget for NAP3.
58

--- Page 59 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
List of References
Ashley, C. and C. LaFranchi. 1997. Livelihood Strategies of Rural Households in Caprivi: Implications
for Conservancies and Natural Resource Management. WWF-LIFE Programme. Windhoek, Namibia.
Aribeb, K.M., and A.W. Mosimane 2011. Strategies that Integrate Environmental Sustainability in
National Development Planning Process to Address Livelihood Concerns of the OvaHimba Tribe in
Namibia - for Country Pilot Partnership for Integrated Sustainable Land Management (CPP -ISLM)
Programme Namibia
Brown L.H. 2009. The Economic Impacts of Climate Change on Commercial Farming in Namibia. MSc
Thesis. University of York.
De Klerk, N. 2004. Bush Encroachment in Namibia. Ministry of Environment and Tourism
Desert Research Foundation of Namibia 2004 Namibia’s Third National Report
on the implementation of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification. For Ministry of
Environment and Tourism
Desert Research Foundation of Namibia & Climate Systems Analysis Group 2008. Climate Change
Vulnerability & Adaptation Assessment Namibia Final Report for the Ministry of Environment and
Tourism March 2008
Desert Research Foundation of Namibia 2009. Environmental Impact Assessment - CBEND Project
Assessment Report.
Dewdney, R. 1996. Policy Factors and Desertification- Analysis and Proposals. Windhoek: Namibian
Programme to Combat Desertification, Steering Committee.
The Global Mechanism (undated) Cashing in on the links between Climate Change and Land
Degradation, The Global Mechanism’s Strategic Programme on Climate Change and Compensation
for Environmental Services (CCES)
Government of Namibia 2008. Green Schemes Policy
Government of Namibia 2008. National Rangeland Management Policy and Strategy
Government of Namibia 2008. Third National Development Plan (NDP3). 2007/2008 – 2011/2012.
ISBN 978-0-86976-778-8
Government of Namibia. Sustainable Land Management Support and Adaptive Management (CPP
NAM SLM SAM) Project Document
Harring S.L. and W Odendaal 2008. KESSL A New Jurisprudence for Land Reform in Namibia. For
Land, Environment and Development Project of the Legal Assistance Centre and NEPRU
Hulme M (ed) 1996. Climate change and southern Africa: an exploration of some potential impacts
and implications in the SADC region. CRU/WWF, Norwich.
Hulme M. R,. Doherty, T. Ngara, M. New and D. Lister 2001. Africa Climate Change: 1900-2000.
Climate Change Research, Vol. 17:145-168.
Humavindu M., J. Barnes, C. Nott, N. de Klerk, B. Kruger 2011. Economic valuation of good rangeland
management and incentives for efficient implementation for the National Rangeland Strategy. A
paper prepared for CPP Namibia.
59

--- Page 60 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
IPCC 2002.Climate change and biodiversity. UNEP, IPCC Technical Paper V. 77p
IPCC 2007.Climate Change.Impacts, adaptation and vulnerability. Contribution to Working Group
II to Fourth Assessment Report on the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Parry, M.L.,
Canziani, O.F., Palutikof, J.P; van der Linden, P.J. and Hanson, C.E. (eds). Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK. 976p
Joint Liaison Group of the Rio Conventions (undated). Forests, Climate Change, Biodiversity and
Land Degradation
Kazapua V.U., Haindongo P., and Shikongo P. 2007. Forest Fire Synopsis Namibia 2006 - 2007
Agricola_2009_No19 for Ministry of Agriculture Water and Forestry, National Remote Sensing
Klintenberg P., and Seely M. 2004. Land Degradation Monitoring In Namibia: A First Approximation
for the Desert Research Foundation of Namibia, Windhoek, Namibia; Department of Physical
Geography and Quaternary Geology, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden
Matambo, Susan and Mary Seely (undated). World Resources Report Case Study. Namibia: Combating
Desertification with Tools for Local-Level Decision Making. World Resources Report, Washington DC.
Mendelsohn J. (2006): Farming Systems in Namibia. RAISON Publishers, Cape Town, South Africa.
Mendelsohn J., Jarvis, A., Roberts, C., and Robertson, T. 2002. Atlas of Namibia: a portrait of the land
and its people. David Philip Publishers, Cape Town.
Midgley G., Hughes, G., Thuiller, W., Drew, G., and Foden, W. 2005. Assessment of potential climate
change impacts on Namibia’s floristic diversity, ecosystem structure and function. South African
National Botanical Institute, Cape Town.
Ministry of Agriculture Water and Forestry 2012. Monthly Burned Area Report September 2012,
Directorate of Forestry
Ministry Of Agriculture, Water & Forestry 2012. Namibia Country Pilot Partnership Programme:
Adapting to Climate Change through the Improvement of Traditional Crops & Livestock Farming
(CPP NAM: CCA) Final Evaluation Report
Ministry of Environment and Tourism 2004. Vital Signs of Namibia: An Integrated State of the
Environment Report
Ministry Of Environment and Tourism 2005. Policy Review on Issues Pertinent to the Improvement
of Land Management and Biodiversity Conservation in Namibia, Extended Summary
Ministry of Environment and Tourism 2010. Namibia’s Draft Fourth National Report to the United
Nations Convention on Biological Diversity (UNCBD)
Ministry of Environment and Tourism 2010. A review of natural resource management policies in
Namibia. Country Pilot Partnership
Ministry of Environment and Tourism 2014. Fifth National Report to the Convention on Biological
Diversity (2010-2014) March 2014
NACSO 2008. Namibia’s communal conservancies – a review of progress and challenges in 2007.
Namibian Association of CBNRM Support Organisations.
NACSO. 2013. The state of community conservation in Namibia - a review of communal
conservancies, community forests and other CBNRM initiatives (2012 Annual Report). NACSO,
Windhoek.
60

--- Page 61 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
Nghitila T, 2013. An Overview of the Country Pilot Partnership (CPP) Programme for Integrated
Sustainable Land Management in Namibia, Presentation made at Global Soil Week 27-31 October
2013
United Nations 1992. Convention On Biological Diversity United Nations
United Nations 1992. United Nations Framework Convention On Climate Change
United Nations 2012. Report of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil 20–22 June 2012 United Nations New York, 2012
61

--- Page 62 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
eht
tnemelpmI
ot
aibimaN
rof
emmargorP
noitcA
lanoitaN
drihT
4202
-
4102
noitacfiitreseD
tabmoC
ot
noitnevnoC
snoitaN
detinU
ylisae
edam
,decudorp
si
elacs
lanoitan
a
ta
noitacfiitresed
tabmoc
ot deen
eht
dna
secaf
aibimaN
sksir
eht
no
noitamrofni
,8102
yB
:1
emoctuO
.snoitutitsni
lanoitacude
dna
hcraeser
,sreganam
dnal
,srekam-ycilop
yb
desu
yllautca
dna
elbissecca
yteicos
livic
dna
cilbup
,noitacinummoc
no
3.1
ot
1.1
semoctuO
,noitacude
dna
gnisiar
ssenerawa
,ycacovdA
no
1
evitcejbO
lanoitarepO
:desserddA
sevitcejbO
lanoitarepO
DCCNU
:noitacude
dna
gnisiar
ssenerawa
,ycacovdA
1
evitcejbO
lanoitarepO
,noitapicitrap
EVITACIDNI
SEICNEGA
YEK
SROTACIDNI
SEITIVITCA
STUPTUO
RAEY-5 TEGDUB
$N
000,054
,FNN
,NFRD,RMFM
,DRWAM
,TEM
noitalupop
efildliw
no
stropeR
latnemnorivne
morf atad
etalsnart
dna
eriuqcA
elbaniatsuS
no
srepap
ycacovda
yciloP
,SEITIROHTUA
LANOITIDART
,AIDEM
porc
,setar
noitatserofed
,sdnert
rof
noitamrofni
otni
semmargorp
gnirotinom
dna
decudorp
)MLS(
tnemeganaM
dnaL
TAEM
,SNOINU
SREMRAF
seicneuqerf
dna
ytireves
erfi
,sdleiy
noitubirtsid
cilbup
no
eettimmoC
lacinhceT
yb
desicilbup
&
TNEMPOLEVED
,ARGA
,DRAOB
5102
yb
MLS
’stroper
tnemnorivne
fo
etats‘
fo
noitcudorP
SKNAB
LAICREMMOC
’tnemnorivnE
fo
etatS‘
fo
hcnuaL
segassem
ycilop
yek
dna
6102
yb
stropeR
ycilop
esicilbup
ot
aidem
htiw
egagnE
secitcarp
tseb
etomorp
dna
slairetam
ycacovda
stsil
noitubirtsid
,selcitra
aideM
dehsilbup
morf
selcitra
ralupop
poleveD
no
ycacovda
rof stupni
sa
hcraeser
cfiitneics
dna
tnemeganam
latnemnorivne
000,052
CPN,TEM
rotces
esu
dnal
dna
PDN
ni
MLS
dna
MLS
no
srepap
noitisop
ycilop
ecudorP
noitadarged
dnal
,noitacfiitresed
launnA
PDN
txen
eht
ni
semmargorp
’erutlucirga
trams
etamilc‘
sa
hcus
sevitaitini
noitatpada
egnahc
etamilc
dna
?8102
noisreV
gninnalp
ni noisulcni
rieht
etomorp
dna
lanoitacude
lla
ot
detubirtsid
rettelswen
snalp
rotces
ni
dna 5
PDN
sa
hcus
stnemucod
aibimaN
ni
snoitutitsni
hcraeser
dna
tnemeltteser
dna sdnal
,yrtserof
,erutlucirga
-
26

--- Page 63 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
eht
tnemelpmI
ot
aibimaN
rof
emmargorP
noitcA
lanoitaN
drihT
4202
-
4102
noitacfiitreseD
tabmoC
ot
noitnevnoC
snoitaN
detinU
000,004
,TVOG
LACOL
,AIMEDACA
,TEM
sepacsdnaL
lacoF
no
stroper
launnA
noitca
dna
semmargorp
E
dna
M
pu
teS
,tnemeganam
eht
no
stropeR
SEITIROHTUA
LANOITIDART
sepacsdnal
lacof
eht
no
semmargorp
lacof‘
fo
yrevocer
dna
noitatilibaher
’sepacsdnal
000,004
NFRD
,FNN
,AIMEDACA
,TEM
noitatpada
egnahc
etamilC
noitamrofni
edivorp
ot
srepap
noissimmoC
tnemnorivnE
eht
fo
etatS‘
defiilpmiS
egnahc
etamilc
dna
sgniteem
etamilc
etomorp
dna
sksir
noitadarged
no
cilbup
ni
dessucsid
,decudorp
’stropeR
rotces
ni
snalp
noitatpada
fo
srotces
yek
eht
ni
seicilop
noitatpada
detubirtsid
dna
desicilbup
,arof
6102
yb
stnemucod
emmargorp
,erutcurts-arfnI
,retaW
,erutlucirgA
-
aibimaN
soiranecs
egnahc
etamilc
fo
noitacilbuP
sPDN
erutuf
ni
dna
aibimaN
tnemnorivnE
snoitacilpmi
rieht
aibimaN
rof
sksir
dna
sdeen
noitatpada
lacol
no
egnahc
etamilc
no
arof
noissucsid
launna
tsoH
noitatpada
000,051
OSCAN
DRFWAM
,TEM
5102
yb
stroper
fo
noitanimessiD
snoitacilpmi
egnahc
etamilc
no
stroper
eraperP
fo
srotces
ecruoser
larutan
dna
dnal
eht
rof
aibimaN
36

--- Page 64 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
eht
tnemelpmI
ot
aibimaN
rof
emmargorP
noitcA
lanoitaN
drihT
4202
-
4102
noitacfiitreseD
tabmoC
ot
noitnevnoC
snoitaN
detinU
lanoitaN
drihT
eht
fo
seitivitcA
evitacidnI
dna
stuptuO
,semoctuO
yeK
fo
selbaT
:I
xennA
emmargorP
noitcA
ylisae
edam
,decudorp
si
elacs
lanoitan
a
ta
noitacfiitresed
tabmoc
ot deen
eht
dna
secaf
aibimaN
sksir
eht
no
noitamrofni
8102
yB
:1
emoctuO
.snoitutitsni
lanoitacude
dna
hcraeser
,sreganam
dnal
,srekam
ycilop
yb
desu
yllautca
dna
elbissecca
yteicos
livic
dna
cilbup
,noitacinummoc
no
3.1
ot
1.1
semoctuO
,noitacude
dna
gnisiar
ssenerawa
,ycacovdA
no 1
evitcejbO
lanoitarepO
:desserddA
sevitcejbO
lanoitarepO
DCCNU
:noitacude
dna
gnisiar
ssenerawa
,ycacovdA
1
evitcejbO
lanoitarepO
,noitapicitrap
EVITACIDNI
SEICNEGA
YEK
SROTACIDNI
SEITIVITCA
STUPTUO
RAEY-5 TEGDUB
$N
000,054
,FNN
,NFRD
,RMFM
,FWAM
,TEM
noitalupop
efildliw
no
stropeR
DDLD
morf
atad
etalsnart
dna eriuqcA
elbaniatsuS
no
srepap
ycacovda
yciloP
,SEITIROHTUA
LANOITIDART
,AIDEM
porc
,setar
noitatserofed
,sdnert
cilbup
rof
noitamrofni
otni
metsys
gnirotinom
dna
decudorp
)MLS(
tnemeganaM
dnaL
TAEM
,SNOINU
SREMRAF
seicneuqerf
dna
ytireves
erfi
,sdleiy
noitubirtsid
no
eettimmoC
lacinhceT
yb
desicilbup
&
TNEMPOLEVED
,ARGA
,DRAOB
5102
yb
MLS
noitadarged
dnal
fo
etats‘
fo noitcudorP
SKNAB
LAICREMMOC
-adargeD
dnaL
fo
etatS‘
fo
hcnuaL
segassem
ycilop
yek
dna ’stroper
8102
yb
stropeR
’noit
ycilop
esicilbup
ot
aidem
htiw egagnE
secitcarp
tseb
etomorp
dna
slairetam
ycacovda
stsil
noitubirtsid
,selcitra
aideM
dehsilbup
morf
selcitra
ralupop
poleveD
no
ycacovda
rof
stupni
sa
hcraeser
cfiitneics seussi
DDLD
000,052
CPN
,TEM
rotces
esu
dnal
dna
PDN
ni
MLS
dna
MLS
no
srepap
noitisop
ycilop
ecudorP
lla
ot
detubirtsid
rettelswen
DDLD
launnA
5PDN
ni
semmargorp
’erutlucirga
trams
etamilc‘
sa
hcus
sevitaitini
ni
snoitutitsni
hcraeser
dna
lanoitacude
gninnalp
ni
noisulcni
rieht
etomorp
dna
aibimaN
snalp
rotces
ni
dna
5
PDN
sa
hcus
stnemucod
tnemeltteser
dna
sdnal
,yrtserof
,erutlucirga
-
46

--- Page 65 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
eht
tnemelpmI
ot
aibimaN
rof
emmargorP
noitcA
lanoitaN
drihT
4202
-
4102
noitacfiitreseD
tabmoC
ot
noitnevnoC
snoitaN
detinU
000,004
,TVOG
LACOL
,AIMEDACA
,TEM
sepacsdnaL
lacoF
no
stroper
launnA
semmargorp
noitaulave
dna
gnirotinom
pu
teS
,tnemeganam
eht
no
stropeR
SEITIROHTUA
LANOITIDART
lacof
eht
no
semmargorp
noitca
dna
lacof‘
fo
yrevocer
dna
noitatilibaher
sepacsdnal
’sepacsdnal
000,004
NFRD
,FNN
,AIMEDACA
,TEM
noitatpada
egnahc
etamilC
noitamrofni
edivorp
ot
srepap
noissimmoC
noitadargeD
dnaL
fo
etatS‘
defiilpmiS
egnahc
etamilc
dna
sgniteem
etamilc
etomorp
dna
sksir
noitadarged
no
cilbup
ni
dessucsid
,decudorp
’stropeR
rotces
ni
snalp
noitatpada
fo
srotces
yek
eht
ni
seicilop
noitatpada
detubirtsid
dna
desicilbup
,arof
6102
yb
stnemucod
emmargorp
,erutcurts-arfnI
,retaW
,erutlucirgA
-
aibimaN
soiranecs
egnahc
etamilc
fo
noitacilbuP
sPDN
erutuf
ni
dna
aibimaN
tnemnorivnE
snoitacilpmi
rieht
aibimaN
rof
sksir
dna
sdeen
noitatpada
lacol
no
egnahc
etamilc
no
arof
noissucsid
launna
tsoH
noitatpada
000,051
OSCAN
DRFWAM
,TEM
5102
yb
stroper
fo
noitanimessiD
snoitacilpmi
egnahc
etamilc
no
stroper
eraperP
fo
srotces
ecruoser
larutan
dna
dnal
eht
rof
aibimaN
56

--- Page 66 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
66
eht
tnemelpmI
ot
aibimaN
rof
emmargorP
noitcA
lanoitaN
drihT
4202
-
4102
noitacfiitreseD
tabmoC
ot noitnevnoC
snoitaN
detinU
thguord
dna
noitadarged
dnal
,noitacfiitresed
sserdda
ot
denehtgnerts
dna
detnemelpmi
ylevitceffe
era
skrowemarf
lanoitutitsni
dna
yciloP
:2
emoctuO .4202
yb
dna
gnissessa
no
5.2
dna
4.2
,3.2
,1.2
semoctuo
eht
lla
ot
tnaveleR
.tnemnorivne
gnilbane
na
etaerc
ot krowemarF
yciloP
no
2
evitcejbO
lanoitarepO
:desserddA
sevitcejbO
DCCNU
rednu
desserdda
si
2.2
emoctuO
.snoitnevnoc
detaler
dna
nalp
siht
neewteb
seigrenys
gnitaerc
dna
,semmargorp
dna
seicilop
lanoitan
ni
MLS
fo
noitargetni
,sreirrab
ycilop
gnisserdda .3
emoctuO
EVITACIDNI
SEICNEGA
YEK
SROTACIDNI
SEITIVITCA
STUPTUO
RAEY-5
$N
TEGDUB 000,053
,DRHGLRM
,RLM
,FWAM
,TEM
eettimmoc
no
stroper
laicfifO
noitaroballoc
rotces-ssorc
fo
tnempoleveD
MLS
tnenamrep
a fo
tnemhsilbatsE
,YTEICOS
LIVIC
,AIMEDACA
laiceps
dna
stroper
snoitarebiled
.CPN
eht
ot
noissimbus
dna
DDLD
rof
sledom
eettimmoC
lacinhceT
SEITIROHTUA
LANOITIDART
5102
srepap
ycilop
dna
lacinhcet
dna
lacinhceT
rotces-retni
na
etaerC
:selpmaxE
dna DDLD
no
seettimmoC
noitanidrooC
yciloP
4102
egnahC
etamilC
,srebmeM
eettimmoC
fo
tnemtnioppA
desab-stluser
dna
sROT
fo
tnempoleved
krow
fo
emmargorp
000,052
/
CADS
/
MPO
/ FWAM
/
TEM
seussi
DDLD
fo
noitargetni
gnortS
ot tnemucod
ycilop
desab-ecneics
a
eraperP
redaorb
dna
3PAN
fo
noitargetnI
CPN
5PDN
nihtiw
nihtiw
MLS
fo
noitomorp
eht
dna
DDLD
etargetni
dnal
elbaniatsus
fo
noitomorp
5
PDN
lanoitaN
ht5
s’aibimaN
otni
tnemeganam
)3202-8102(
nalP
tnempoleveD
66

--- Page 67 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
eht
tnemelpmI
ot
aibimaN
rof
emmargorP
noitcA
lanoitaN
drihT
4202
-
4102
noitacfiitreseD
tabmoC
ot noitnevnoC
snoitaN
detinU
000,004
DRHGLRM
/
RLM
/
FWAM
/
TEM
lacol
fo noitaulave
dna
gnirotinoM
eht
fo
sesseccus
dna
segnellahc
eht
ssessA
deknil
serutcurts
ecnanrevog
level
lacoL
OSCAN
/
ecnanrevog
latnemnorivne
level
serutcurts
ecnanrevog
level
lacol tnereffid
rehtruf
tnemeganam
dnal
elbaniatsus
ot
serutcurts
secruoser
larutan
ot gnitaler
sa
hcus
–
derewopme
dna
denehtgnerts
ytinummoc
,seettimmoc
ycnavresnoc
ot
stnemssessa
no
desab
snoitnevretni
tegraT
nisab
,sdraob
dnal
lanummoc
,stserof
serutcurts
ecnanrevog
level
lacol nehtgnerts
retaw
,seettimmoc
tnemeganam
gnitekram
kcotsevil
,snoitaicossa
tniop
.cte
seettimmoc
000,054
CPN
dna
RLM
,FWAM
,TEM
cilbup
dna
noitpoda
laicfifO
/
DL rof
ycilop
gnidnuf
a esoporp
dna eraperP
rof
sevitnecni
level
ycilop
no
lasoporP
ycilop
gnidnuf
fo
noitaralced
rof
tnemugra
cimonoce
na etartsnomeD
–
MLS
eht
etomorp
ot
noitaroballoc
rotces-ssorc
CADS
gnidnuf
ni
esaercnI
.6102
yb
MLS
ni
stnemtsevni
mret-gnol
dna
trohs
dna
semmargorp
MLS
fo
noitatnemelpmi
OSCAN
,DRAOB
CIMONORGA
7102
yb
DL
ot
snoitacolla
noitacfiitresed
gnittabmoc
rotces-ssorc
rof
sevitnecni
fo tnempoleveD
–
noitacfiitreseD
dna
DL
no noitaroballoc
5102
– PPC
eht ot ecnerefer
stroper
dna
slasoporp
gnidnuf
tnioJ
6102
yb
seicnegA
tnemnrevoG
yb
tramS
etamilC“
fo
tpecnoc
eht etaroprocnI
erutlucirgA
fo
stnemtrapeD
eht lla
ni ”erutlucirgA
sredlohekats
dloh
ot seitivitca
esilamroF
,FWAM
dna
TEM
neewteb
sUOM
larutlucirgA
tramS
etamilC
ot elbatnuocca
ymonorgA
dna
TEM
neewteb
secitcarP
yb
rotceS
etavirP
eht
dna
draoB 6102
MRNBC
s’aibimaN
ot
troppus
ycilop edivorP
aera
lanummoc
ylralucitrap
,emmargorP
stserof
ytinummoc
dna
seicnavresnoc
MPO
,FWAM
,TEM
dna
ycilop
thguord
desiveR
lanoitaN
fo
noitatnemelpmi
fo
weiver tuo
yrraC
fo
nekatrednu
weiver
lacitirC
ygetarts
ygetartS
dna
yciloP thguorD
thguorD
lanoitaN
eht
fo
noitatnemelpmi
)7991(
ygetartS
dna
yciloP
morf
stsoc
laicos
dna
namuH
tnemelpmi
dna
weiver
fo sgnidnfi
etubirtsiD
stneve
thguord
thguord
ecnahne
ot snoitadnemmocer
ssenderaperp
76

--- Page 68 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
68
eht
tnemelpmI
ot
aibimaN
rof
emmargorP
noitcA
lanoitaN
drihT
4202
-
4102
noitacfiitreseD
tabmoC
ot
noitnevnoC
snoitaN
detinU
008
WCEGM
,FWAM
,TEM
stroper
noisses
gniniarT
etamilc
no
noitamrofni
fo
noitanimessiD
demaertsniam
snoisnemid
desab
redneG
dna
nemow
ot
sksir
dna
noitacfiitresed
,egnahc
semmargorP
MLS
ni
spuorg
elbarenluv
snoitacilbuP
nemow
fo
elor
eht
no
troper
dna
hcraeseR
dna
noitatpada
,noitacfiitresed
gnitabmoc
ni
noitagitim
lacinhcet
dna
laicnanfi
detegraT
lacof
ni
spuorg
nemow
ot
troppus
,noitacfiitresed
gnitabmoc
no
gniniart
reffO
sepacsdnal
noitagitim
dna
noitatpada
86

--- Page 69 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
eht
tnemelpmI
ot
aibimaN
rof
emmargorP
noitcA
lanoitaN
drihT
4202
-
4102
noitacfiitreseD
tabmoC
ot
noitnevnoC
snoitaN
detinU
dnal
sdrawot
evom
ot
aibimaN
rof
8102
yb
ecalp
ni
era
sessecorp
evitroppus
dna
8102
yb ecalp
ni
metsyS
gnirotinoM
DDLD
lanoitcnuf
A
:3
emoctuO
ytilartuen
noitadarged
enilesab
fo
noitcelloc
no
2.2
emoctuO
,2
evitcejbO
lanoitarepO
.noitacude
dna
,noitaerc
ssenerawa
dna
noitacinummoc
no 1
evitcejbO
lanoitarepO
:desserddA
sevitcejbO
DCCNU
lanoitan
no
1.3
emoctuO
.4.3
ot
1.3
semoctuo
sti
lla
dna
egdelwonK
dna
ygolonhceT
ecneicS
no
3 evitcejbO
lanoitarepO
.atad
dna
noitamrofni
cimonoce-oicos
dna
lacisyhpoib
PAN
siht ni 4
emoctuO
rednu
osla
si
stnemssessa
ytilibarenluv
dna
gnirotinom
EVITACIDNI
SEICNEGA
YEK
SROTACIDNI
SEITIVITCA
STUPTUO
RAEY-5
$N
TEGDUB
000,000,1
aimedacA
,NFRD
,FWAM
,TEM
fo tnetxe
eht
no
stroper
lacinhceT
gnirotinom
eht rof
metsys
ro
erutcurts
a
pu
teS
evitaroballoc
lanoitutitsni
desoporp
A
noitadarged
dna
noitacfiitresed
gniveihca
ot weiv
a htiw
aibimaN
ni DDLD
fo
noitamrofni
dna
atad
tcelloc
ot erutcurts
8102
yb
lanoitan
eht
ta ytilartuen
noitadarged
dnal
aibimaN
ni
sessecorp
noitadarged
no
level
,segnahc
revoc
tserof
,efildliw
,retaw
–
stluser
terpretni
dna rotinom
ot
yticapac
dliuB
,sdleiy
kcotsevil
,sdleiy
porc
,sdnalegnar
snoitca
lacitcarp
otni
gnidoofl
,llafniar
,erutarepmet
,slios
hgih
ro
elbarenluv
ylhgih ebircsed
dna yfitnedI
snrettap
lacoF
esoohc
ot hcihw
morf
sepacsdnal
ksir
dna
hcraeser
,krow
noitarotser
rof sepacsdnaL noitacude
dna
locotorp
gnirehtag
noitamrofni
nA
gnitsixe
fo sutats
eht tnemucod
dna
ssessA
dna
egarots
rof
esabatad
lanoitcnuf
a
suoirav
morf semmargorp
gnirotinom
eht
no
noitamrofni
dna
atad
fo laveirter
LACIGOLOROETEM
,TEM
,FWAM
:snoitutitsni
sti
dna
dnal
fo
noitadarged
dna
etats
RMFM
,RLM
,NFRD ,ECIVRES
secruoser
larutan
yek
no atad
enilesab
tcelloc
/ elipmoC
.g.e selbairav
latnemnorivne
noitatserofed
lacirotsih
dna
aera
dedooW
•
setar
tserof
dna
noitatserofed
fo srevirD
•
noitadarged
-atad(
mroftalP
tenretnI-SIG
derahs
A
htlaeh lioS
•
dna
daolpu
ot
sredlohekats
rof
)esab
hsub
fo
sessalc ytisned
dna aerA
•
-sinimda
,noitamrofni
dna
atad
erahs
saera
dehcaorcne
ytirohtua
detangised
lartnec
a yb
deret
ytireves
dna
ycneuqerf
eriF
•
noitadarged
fo ksir hgih
rednu
saerA
•
saera
hcir-kcotsevil
ni seitisned
gnikcotS
•
secitcarp
gninnalp
esu dnaL
•
citamilc-orga
–
atad
citamilC
•
96

--- Page 70 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
70
eht
tnemelpmI
ot
aibimaN
rof
emmargorP
noitcA
lanoitaN
drihT
4202
-
4102
noitacfiitreseD
tabmoC
ot
noitnevnoC
snoitaN
detinU
000,005
,aimedacA
,NFRD
FWAM
,TEM
morf
dehcnual
stroper
lacinhceT
fo
srevird
eht no
sesylana
noissimmoC
no
atad
ot
ssecca
dna
fo
noitacilbuP
CTWM
,TSRCN
sdrawno
5102
dna
aibimaN
ni
noitacfiitresed
/
noitadarged
citameht
ni
noitadarged
dnal
ni
sdnert
noitagitim
fo
ngised
eht
no
snoitacilpmi
rieht
,tnemhcaorcne
hsub
,revoc
tserof(
saera
seicnega
tnaveler
yb snoitca
dna
–
)sdoofl
,sthguord
,snoitidnoc
egnar
elbanoitca
ni
sdnert
eht
fo
noitaterpretni
,tcelloc
ot
msinahcem
lanoitutitsni
na pu
teS
smret
stluser
eht
esu
dna
esylana
gninnalp
esu
dnal
ni
sdnert
fo
noitaterpretnI
000,005
,aimedacA
,NFRD
,TEM
sfeirb
ycilop
,srepap
cfiitneicS
ycilop
fo
noitcudorp
rof
yticapac
edivorP
dnal
fo
etats‘
eht
fo
noitcudorp
ralugeR
stroper
cfiitneics
morf
devired
stnemucod
aibimaN
rof
’stroper
noitadarged
fo
etatS
eht
woh
no
troper
dna ssessA
deniatsus
neeb
sah
tropeR
seicnavresnoC
)noitareneg
egdelwonk(
cfiitneics
htob
gnidliuB
esitrepxe
)snoitacilppa(
lacigolonhcet
dna
dna
spihswollef
- tnemeganam
dnal yrd
ni
snoitutitsni
hcraeser
htiw
spihsrentrap
dna
seitinummoc
detceffa
dna
,4202
yb
desrever
dna
detlah
era
sepacsdnaL
lacoF
ni sessecorp
noitadarged
dnal
dna
noitacfiitreseD
:4
emoctuO
thguord
fo
stcapmi
eht
etagitim
ot
denehtgnerts
smetsysoce
.snoitalupop
larur
fo
ylralucitrap
,gnidliub
yticapac
no
4
evitcejbO
lanoitarepO
,egdelwonK
dna
ygolonhceT
,ecneicS
no
3 evitcejbO
lanoitarepO
:desserddA
sevitcejbO
DCCNU
.tnempoleveD
laruR
dna
erutlucirgA
no
seicilop
nwo
s’aibimaN
sesserddA
07

--- Page 71 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
eht
tnemelpmI
ot
aibimaN
rof
emmargorP
noitcA
lanoitaN
drihT
4202
-
4102
noitacfiitreseD
tabmoC
ot
noitnevnoC
snoitaN
detinU
EVITACIDNI
SEICNEGA
YEK
SROTACIDNI
SEITIVITCA
STUPTUO
.i
RAEY-5 TEGDUB $
MAN
000,005
ETAVIRP
,RLM
,FWAM
,TEM
stroper
sutatS
/
tnemeganam
fo
etats
eht
ebircseD
tsael
ta
fo
noitpircsed
eht
no
tnemucod
A
ROTCES
eht
ni
secruoser
sti
dna
dnal
fo
noitadarged
a
gnitneserper
,aibimaN
ni
sepacsdnal
5
eb
ot
segnellahc
eht
dna
sepacsdnaL
lacoF
tsael
ta
gnidulcni
dna
sesu
dnal
fo
xim
desserdda
etis
dehcaorcne
hsub
eno
000,057
,ROTCES
HTLAEH
,FWAM
,TEM
stropeR
lacisyhp-oib
htob
;noitamrofni
enilesab
tcelloC
latnemnorivne
enilesab
fo noitacilbuP
,YCNEGA
SCITSITATS
LANOITAN
erutuf
eht
gnirotinom
rof
cimonoce-oicos
dna
hcae
rof
atad
cimonoce-oicos
dna
,SRESU
DNAL
,ROTCES
ETAVIRP
tnemeganam
devorpmi
fo
stcapmi
ediug
dna
dia
ot
epacsdnal
lacof
sOGN
edulcni
ot
sihT
.gnirotinom
erutuf
locotorp
noitcelloc
atad
a fo
tnempoleveD
tnemssessa
ytilibarenluv‘
evisneherpmoc
dna
ycnetsisnoc
erusne
ot
senilediug
ro
dna
egnahc
etamilc
ot
ylralucitrap
,’stroper
sdradnats
muminim
ot
ecnerehda
17

--- Page 72 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
72
eht
tnemelpmI
ot
aibimaN
rof
emmargorP
noitcA
lanoitaN
drihT
4202
-
4102
noitacfiitreseD
tabmoC
ot
noitnevnoC
snoitaN
detinU
000,000,13
,TEM
,FWAM
,HGLRM
7102
yb
noitarotser
rednu
aerA
/
noitarotser
tnemelpmi-oc
dna
poleveD
elacspu
ot
slocotorp
elbatnemelpmI
SEITIROHTUA
LANOITIDART
tseb‘
elbaliava
no desab
,snalp
yrevocer
dnuora
dna
nihtiw
secitcarp
MLS
tseb
lacoF“
elbarenluv
defiitnedi
rof
’secitcarp
,noitagirri
pird(
sepacsdnal
lacof
”sepacsdnaL
devorpmi
,erutlucirga
noitavresnoc
ytinummoc
,tnemeganam
egnar
dna
cimonoce
,stropeR
E
dna
M
etaidemmi
rof
)noitavresnoc
desab
stroper
tnemssessa
lacisyhp-oib
’erutlucirgA
tramS etamilC‘
a poleveD
nopu
ward
lliw
sihT
.noitatnemelpmi
6102
yb
FWAM
htiw
noitcnujnoc
ni emmargorp
ni
sevitaitini
tsap
fo
stnemeveihca
eht
sepacsdnal
lacof
eht
nihtiw
noitatnemelpmi
rof
.DOCPAN
dna
PPC
eht
yleman
aibimaN
srehto
dna
PPC
fo secneirepxe
no
desaB
snalp
noitatnemelpmI
tseb
elacs-pu
dna
tnemelpmi
,aibimaN
ni
stroper
lacinhceT
:ni
secitcarp
noitagirri
pirD
•
noitcudorp
devorpmI
”erutlucirga
noitavresnoC
•
noitpoda
fo
etaR
tnemeganam
hsuB
•
noitavresnoc
desab
ytinummoC
•
–
tnemeganam
dnalegnar
devorpmI
•
gnizarg
lanoitator
.g.e
efildliw
desab
ytinummoC
•
tnemeganam
niatniam
ot
snalp
gnidnuf
elbaniatsus
poleveD
sepacsdnal
lacof
eht
nihtiw
semmargorp
MLS
’srotanidrooC
ro
sredaeL
epacsdnaL‘
5
tiurceR
27

--- Page 73 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
eht
tnemelpmI
ot
aibimaN
rof
emmargorP
noitcA
lanoitaN
drihT
4202
- 4102
noitacfiitreseD
tabmoC
ot
noitnevnoC
snoitaN
detinU
ydaerlA
,WCEGM
,FWAM
,TEM
snalp
tnemrewopme
dehsilbuP
dna
lacinhcet
,lanoitazinagro
eht
ssessA
dna
nemow
rof
snalp
tnemrewopmE
detegdub
sOGN
,SEITIROHTUA
LANOITIDART
elbarenluv
dna
nemow
rof
sdeen
laicnanfi
noitarotser
ot
deknil
,spuorg
elbarenluv
dna
nemow
fo
rebmun
ehT
rednu
rof
spuorg
sepacsdnal
lacof
eht
ni semmargorp
ni
devlovni
spuorg
elbarenluv
2
emoctuo
semmargorp
noitarotser
etatilicaf
ot
seigetarts
tnemrewopme
esoporP
noitarotser
epacsdnal
ni
noitapicitrap
rieht krow
000,057
,TEM
,FWAM
,HGLRM
dnal
lacol
fo
noitingocer
lamroF
PPC
dna
DOCPAN
fo
stnemeveihca
eht
weiveR
serutcurts
eht
evorpmi
ot semmargorP
LACOL
,SEITIROHTUA
LANOITIDART
tnemeganam
ecruoser
dna
ngiseD
.noitanidrooc
level
lacol
no
FWAM
dna
snoitutitsni
lacol
fo
snoitcnuf
dna
SNOITASINAGRO
YTINUMMOC
fo
snagro
lla
yb
serutcurts
dna
gninoitcnuf
rieht
evorpmi
ot
snoitca
yrtseroF
ytinummoC
dna
ycnavresnoC(
tnemnrevog
sepacsdnaL
lacoF
ni
tnemelpmi
detargetnI
rof
smuroF
, ,seettimmoC
,SMRIF
ro tnemeganaM
ecruoseR
egnaR
dna
gnitekraM
kcotseviL
dnuora
seettimmoc
lanoitcnuF
lliw
ohw
)seettimmoC
tnemeganaM
sepacsdnaL
lacoF
dna
tnemeganam
eht
ni
srentrap
eb
’sepacsdnaL
lacoF‘
eht
fo
noitarotser
37

--- Page 74 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
eht
tnemelpmI
ot
aibimaN
rof
emmargorP
noitcA
lanoitaN
drihT
4202
-
4102
noitacfiitreseD
tabmoC
ot
noitnevnoC
snoitaN
detinU
dnal
elbaniatsus
tnemelpmi
ot
sremraf
llams
dna
seitinummoc
gnitroppus
dna
ecalp
ni era
seitilicaf
gnikam
tnarg
dna
gnidnel
laicnaniF
:5
emoctuO
.7102
yb
tnemeganam
osla
era
yticapac
gnisiardnuf
dna
snoitaitogeN
labolG
no
,5.5
dna
,3.5
.2.5
sa
hcus
semoctuo
rehtO
.4.5 dna
1.5
semoctuO
,4
evitcejbO
lanoitarepO
:desserddA
sevitcejbO
DCCNU
.PAN
siht
ni
desserdda
TEGDUB
RAEY-5
EVITACIDNI
SEICNEGA
YEK
SROTACIDNI
SEITIVITCA
STUPTUO
$N
000,052
,FOM
,CPN
,TEM
/DL
no
stegdub
tnempoleved
weN
rof
dekramrae
sdnuf
etacolla
ot
CPN
eht
egagnE
ot
–
gnicnanfi
troppus
remraf
no
yciloP
RLM
7102
yb
MLS
krow
detaler
MLS/DL
dna
llams
no
ycilop
tnerruc
ot
deknil
eb
sesirpretne
muidem
000,003
,SKNAB
,CPN
,TEM
noitativni
,slasoporp
gnidnuf
rof
llaC
&
MLS
troppus
ot
stnemurtsni
laicnanfi
etaerC
gnicnanfi
fo
noitomorp
eht
rof
murof
A
SRONOD
,RLM
6102
yb
,semehcs
naol
llams
rof
selpmaxe
dednemmoceR
tnempoleved
larur
secruoser
larutan
dna
dnal
devorpmi
fo
:era
hcus
noitutitsni
na
yb deL
– tnemeganam
dnuF
tnemtsevnI
latnemnorivnE
eht
sa
,tnemnrevoG
ni
dnuF
MLS
nA
•
dna
MLS
rof
snaol
tseretni
wol
lanoitcnuF
ronod-itlum(
MLS
rof
stnarG
evititepmoC
•
dna
seigolonhcet
noitcudorp
devorpmi
,)dnuf
teksab
– secitcarp
ygolonhcet
dia ot
semehcS
naoL
laicepS
•
rof
semehcs
stnarg
evititepmoc
A
gnoma
gnilacs-pu
dna
noisuffid
,noitpoda
snoitaicossa
gnimraf
dna
laudividni
sremraf
larur
-itlum
rof
dnuf
tnemnrevog
detacided
A
a
–
MLS
htiw
detaicossa
stcejorp
rotces
tnemrewopme
eht
rof
noisivorp
gnitaerC
•
dnuF
MLS
yrotutatS
evitnecni
laicnanfi
hguorht
nemow
fo
semehcs
dna
noitasilitu
hsub
rof
emehcs
gnicnaniF
•
tnemevorpmi
erutsap
gnicnanfi-orciM
fo
noitomorp
dna
gnitseT
•
erehwesle
dekrow
evah
taht
semehcs
47

--- Page 75 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
eht
tnemelpmI
ot
aibimaN
rof
emmargorP
noitcA
lanoitaN
drihT
4202
-
4102
noitacfiitreseD
tabmoC
ot
noitnevnoC
snoitaN
detinU
000,052
TEM
yb
stnarg
wen
,stnemucod
tcejorP
laretal-itlum
ot
slasoporp
hguorht
gnisiardnuF
laretalitlum
dna
ib
morf
gnidnuf
weN
5102
secruos
laretalib
dna
FEG
sa
hcus
secruos
secruos
000,005
yteicoS
liviC
,TEM
srepaP
noitisoP
CDAS
dna
yrtnuoC
-non
rof
eugolaid
labolg
eht
ni
tnemegagnE
rof
sdnuf
erom
ssecca
ot
seirtnuoc
I
xennA
nI
.noitatpada
dna
noitadarged
gnitabmoc
ygolonhcet
rof
gnidnuf
kees
osla
,ssecorp
eht
noitpoda
dna
refsnart
57

--- Page 76 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
76
eht
tnemelpmI
ot
aibimaN
rof
emmargorP
noitcA
lanoitaN
drihT
4202
-
4102
noitacfiitreseD
tabmoC
ot
noitnevnoC
snoitaN
detinU
demaertsniam
era
noitagitim
dna
noitatpada
fo
troppus
ni
ecneics
egnahc
etamilc
dna
tnemeganam
dnal
elbaniatsus
fo stcepsa
no hcraeseR
:6 emoctuO
.0202
yb
secivres
noisnetxe
dna
snoitutitsni
lanoitacude
yraitret
dna hcraeser
ni
,ecneics
no
3
evitcejbO
lanoitarepO
,ssenerawa
dna
ycacovda
no
1 evitcejbO
lanoitarepO
osla
dna
gnidliub
yticapac
no
4
evitcejbO
lanoitarepO
:desserddA
sevitcejbO
DCCNU
.egdelwonk
dna ygolonhcet
RAEY-5
EVITACIDNI
SEICNEGA
YEK
SROTACIDNI
SEITIVITCA
STUPTUO
$N
TEGDUB
000,000,2
,FWAM
,TEM
5102
yb
tropeR
-fles
yticapac
s’aibimaN
fo
weiveR
deriuqer
no troper
tnemssessa
nA
EOM
,aimedacA
ylniam
tub
slevel
eerht
eht
ta
tnemssessa
lanoitan
a tnemelpmi
ot seiticapac
ot
slevel
laudividni
dna
lanoitutitsni
ta
dna
MLS etomorp
ot emmargorp
noitacfiitresed
tabmoc
eb
dluohs
taht
spag
ebircsed
dna
enfied
tnempoleved
slliks lacinhcet
A
lanoitarepo
rehto
eht
edisgnola
desserdda
yticapac
lanoitan
evorpmi ot
nalp
.sevitcejbo
dna gnirotinom
,hcraeser
rof
dna MLS fo
noitatnemelpmi
semmargorp
noitacfiitresed-itna egnahc etamilc
:selpmaxE(
semmargorp
gnidliub
yticapac
fo
gnidnuF
,gnidliub
oiranecs
dna gnilledom
,stroper
sesehT
etaudarg-tsoP
ytisrevinu
ta
gniniart
lamrof
-
hguorht
sserts
,gnisneS
setomeR dna
SIG
level
ycilop
,stroper
lacinhcet
,gnirotinom(
semmargorp
hcraeser
,level
dna
lamina ,sporc
ni ygoloisyhp
6102
morf
–
sfeirb
senilediug
esu
elbaniatsus
,gnilledom
,SIG
)gnideerb
tnalp
eht ssessa ot
nalp hcraeser
A
ngised
,pihsrotnem
,secruoser
larutan
no
lacoF
fo esnopser
dna ytivitisnes
sesruoc
fo
noitatilibaher
ot sepacsdnaL
– semeht
hcraeseR(
– semmargorp
ecnarelot
sserts dna
egnahc etamilc
dna
retaw ,slamina
dna sporc
ni
etamilc
,sporc ni ycneicfife
tneirtun
dna
arofl fo tnemevom
decudni
noitadarged
fo tnempoleved
,anuaf
stcepsa
cimonoce gnilledom
,secidni
dna
noitacfiitresed
,noitadarged
fo
)seigolonhcet
devorpmi
fo noitpoda
egnahc
etamilc no
seludom gniniarT
rof depoleved
seussi MLS
dna
yraitret
fo alucirruc
eht otni noisulcni
.aibimaN
fo snoitutitsni
67

--- Page 77 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
eht
tnemelpmI
ot
aibimaN
rof
emmargorP
noitcA
lanoitaN
drihT
4202
-
4102
noitacfiitreseD
tabmoC
ot
noitnevnoC
snoitaN
detinU
000,005
,FWAM
,TEM
dengis
sUOM
fo
rebmuN
fo
noitaerc
-
yticapaC
lanoitutitsnI
rof
spihsrentrap
lanoitutitsnI
cilbuP
,CPN
smsinahcem
evitaroballoc
rotces-ssorc
ro
dehcnual
gniniart
dna
hcraeser
ecivreS
ni
slliks
elbaliava
fo
esu
ezimixam
ot
denehtgnerts
noissimmoC
aibimaN
a)CSP(
neewteb
spihsrentrap
fo
noitaerC
dna
seitinummoc
gnimraf
,
tnemnrevog
rotces
etavirp
eht
-ssorc
rof
stnarg
gniniart
dna
hcraeseR
stcejorp
evitaroballoc
rotces
77

--- Page 79 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024

--- Page 80 ---
Third National Action Programme for Namibia to Implement the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 2014 - 2024
REPUBLIC OF NAMIBIA
Ministry of Environment & Tourism
Department of Environmental Affairs
Ministry of Environment and Tourism
Private Bag 13306
Windhoek
Namibia
Tel: +264 61 284 2701
Fax: +264 61 240 339
www.met.gov.na