--- Page 1 ---
THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA
VICE PRESIDENT’S OFFICE
GUIDELINES FOR MAINSTREAMING
NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMME TO
COMBAT DESERTIFICATION INTO SECTORAL
POLICIES, PLANS AND PROGRAMMES
DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENT
NOVEMBER, 2014

--- Page 2 ---
2

--- Page 3 ---
FOREWORD
Land is a natural resource base for which all communities in the country depend on for
their livelihood. However, human activities, among other factors, have largely contributed
to its degradation which is associated with decreasing land quality and value. In Tanzania,
land degradation is mostly contributed by unsustainable land use practices, which
threatens the social and economic development. The consequences of land degradation
are numerous and serious including reduced land productivity, food insecurity, decrease of
income and livelihoods, destruction of habitats and ecosystems, loss of biodiversity, and
human migration. These challenges among others, call for the need of preparing a practical
and technical guide that will enhance mainstreaming of sustainable land management
approaches into sectoral policies, plans and programmes.
Land degradation can be minimized and land quality restored to a large extent. Protecting
and restoring the function and services that have been lost is a priority towards sustainable
land management. In this context, the Government has taken various initiatives across
the country to combat desertification, land degradation and drought. These initiatives
include, among others, formulation and implementation of relevant policies, strategies
and programmes; promoting adoption of sustainable land management practices such as
integrated land use plans, integrated soil fertility management, conservation agriculture;
rainwater harvesting, agro-forestry, and improvement of livestock management systems;
supporting alternative income generating activities.
Despite such efforts, the problem of land degradation and its associated impact has continued
to persist. Such situation calls for more concerted effort to reduce the magnitude of the
problem. This entails the need for integrated approach to facilitate adoption of sustainable
land management practices to address challenges posed by land degradation in the country.
Cognizant of this fact, these Guidelines have been developed to facilitate and ensure that
relevant policies, plans, programmes integrate sustainable land management practices with
a wider-reaching set of outcomes towards achieving sustainable development.
The Guidelines cover brief country situational analysis and initiatives undertaken to
address land degradation; description on step by step framework to be followed when
mainstreaming Desertification Land Degradation and Drought concerns in sectoral
policies, plans and programmes; institutional arrangement and roles of key stakeholders;
and monitoring framework.
The task of mainstreaming sustainable land management should be at the forefront of
development planning and policy formulation across all sectors. It is my sincere hope
that these Guidelines will be useful in supporting and enhancing the mainstreaming of
i

--- Page 4 ---
DLDD issues in respective sectoral policies, plans and programmes. I therefore urge all
sectors and other stakeholders to make use of these Guidelines for achieving sustainable
development.
Eng. Dr. Binillith S. Mahenge (MP)
MINISTER OF STATE,
VICE PRESIDENT’S OFFICE (ENVIRONMENT)
ii

--- Page 5 ---
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Successful preparation of these Guidelines is a result of the commitment and hard work
by many individuals and institutions. It is not possible to mention them all, but I would
like to take this opportunity to assure them our heartfelt appreciation that we value their
cooperation and support.
I would like to thank Sector Ministries, Departments and Agencies for participating in the
preparation of these Guidelines. These include President’s Office - Planning Commission
(POPC); Prime Minister’s Office Regional Administration and Local Government Authority
(PMO-RALG); Ministry of Agriculture, Food Security and Cooperatives; Ministry of Livestock
and Fisheries Development; Ministry of Water; Ministry of Natural Resources and Tourism;
Ministry of Energy and Minerals; Ministry of Health and Social Welfare; and Ministry of
Lands, Housing and Human Settlements Development; Tanzania Forest Services; National
Environment Management Council; and Ardhi University.
I wish to express my appreciation to the Journalists Environmental Association of Tanzania
(JET) for their inputs in these Guidelines.
I thank the Director of Environment, Dr. J. Ningu; Assistant Director Mr. R. Muyungi and
members of the Secretariat from the Vice President’s Office for ensuring completion of these
Guidelines.
Lastly, I wish to extend our special thanks to the Global Environment Facility (GEF) through
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) for providing financial support that
enabled preparation of these Guidelines.
Sazi B. Salula
PERMANENT SECRETARY
VICE PRESIDENT’S OFFICE
iii

--- Page 6 ---
LIST OF ABRIVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AWC Available Water holding Capacity
CBOs Community Based Organizations
CSOs Civil Society Organizations
CEMO City Environment Management Officer
DEMO District Environment Management Officer
DLDD Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought
DPs Development Partners
EA Environmental Audit
EIA Environmental Impact Assessment
EMA Environmental Management Act
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization
FBOs Faith Based Organizations
GBS General Budget Support
GM Global Mechanism
GEF Global Environment Facility
LGAs Local Government Authorities
MDAs Ministries Department and Agencies
MEAs Multilateral Environmental Agreements
MEMO Municipal Environment Management Officer
M&E Monitoring and Evaluation
MKUKUTA Mkakati wa Kukuza Uchumi na Kupunguza Umaskini Tanzania
MTEF Medium Term Expenditure Framework
NAP National Action Programme to Combat Desertification
NEAP National Environmental Action Plan
NEP National Environmental Policy
NEMC National Environment Management Council
iv

--- Page 7 ---
PACD Plan of Action to Combat Desertification
PPP Public Private Partnership
PMO-RALG Prime Minister’s Office – Regional Administration and Local Government
SLM Sustainable Land Management
SOC Soil Organic Carbon
SWOC Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Challenges
TEMO Town Environment Management Officer
TSD Topsoil depth
UNEP United Nations Environment Programme
UNCOD United Nation Conference on Desertification
UNDP United Nations Development Programme
UNCCD United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification
UNCED United Nation Conference on Environment and Development
VPO Vice President’s Office
v

--- Page 8 ---
TABLE OF CONTENTS
FOREWORD ................................................ I
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT .........................................III
LIST OF ABRIVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS ...........................IV
CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION.................................. 1
1.1 BACKGROUND INFORMATION ........................... 1
1.2 OBJECTIVE OF THE GUIDELINES .......................... 2
1.3 JUSTIFICATION OF THE GUIDELINES ....................... 2
1.4 SCOPE OF THE GUIDELINES............................. 2
1.5 METHODOLOGY OF PREPARING THE GUIDELINES ............... 3
CHAPTER TWO: INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK ....................... 4
2.1 INTRODUCTION ................................... 4
2.2 POLICY FRAMEWORK ................................ 4
2.3 LEGAL FRAMEWORK ................................. 4
2.4 INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK ........................... 4
CHAPTER THREE: STATUS OF LAND DEGRADATION AND INITIATIVES TO
COMBAT LAND DEGRADATION IN TANZANIA......................... 8
3.1 STATUS OF LAND DEGRADATION ......................... 8
3.1.1 Land cover change ............................10
3.1.2 Soil fertility and crop production ..................... 8
3.1.3 Salinization ................................. 9
3.1.4 Soil erosion ................................. 9
3.1.5 Soil acidification ..............................10
3.1.6 Siltation ..................................10
3.1.7 Loss of vegetation .............................10
3.1.8 Soil pollution................................11
3.2 INITIATIVES TO COMBAT LAND DEGRADATION ................11
vi

--- Page 9 ---
CHAPTER FOUR: GUIDELINES FOR MAINSTREAMING NAP INTO SECTORAL
POLICIES, PLANS AND PROGRAMMES ............................ 14
4.1 GENERAL GUIDELINES ..............................14
4.2 SECTOR POTENTIAL INTERVENTIONS FOR MAINSTREAMING NAP......16
4.2.1 National Development Plans and Strategies (Finance) .........16
4.2.2 Agriculture .................................18
4.2.3 Livestock ..................................21
4.2.4 Water ....................................23
4.2.5 Energy....................................24
4.2.6 Industry ..................................25
4.2.7 Tourism ..................................27
4.2.8 Forestry ..................................28
4.2.9 Mining ...................................30
4.2.10 Land ....................................30
4.2.11 Coastal and Marine ............................31
4.2.12 Fisheries ..................................32
4.2.13 Wildlife and Wetland ...........................34
4.2.14 Transport ..................................35
4.2.15 Health....................................36
4.3 SECTORAL MAINSTREAMING ACTION PLAN ..................37
4.4 MONITORING AND EVALUATION .........................37
CHAPTER FIVE: OPERATIONALIZATION OF THE GUIDELINES............. 38
5.1 INTRODUCTION ..................................38
5.2 STANDARD FOR OPERATIONALIZATION .....................38
ANNEX................................................... 40
DEFINITION OF TERMINOLOGIES AND CONCEPTS ................... 40
vii

--- Page 10 ---
viii

--- Page 11 ---
CHAPTER ONE
INTRODUCTION
1.1 Background Information
Land is a scarce natural resource in which majority of people rely on for their sustainable
livelihood. However, climatic and anthropogenic factors have largely contributed to
land degradation which has been associated with decreasing land quality and value.
According to the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD)
(1994) statistics, land degradation affects 1.5 billion people globally. On the other
side, 2.6 billion people depend directly on agriculture, but 52% of the land used for
agriculture is moderately or severely affected by soil degradation while arable land
loss estimated at 30 to 35 times the historical rate. Due to drought and desertification
each year 12 million hectares are lost worldwide.
In Tanzania, land degradation, which in most cases is due to unsustainable land
management practices, threaten the social and economic development as well as
livelihoods. Regions with high population densities per square kilometers have a
remarkable high rate of land degradation. Rapid population growth is associated
with declining amount of land for pasture, which triggers seasonal migration of
pastoralists and their livestock. Pastoral and agro pastoral migrants like Maasai
and Sukuma people from Arusha, Manyara, Shinyanga, Simiyu and Geita who are
migrating to Mbeya, Mtwara, Morogoro, Tanga and Rukwa regions in search of
pasture and agricultural land has been one of the causes of land degradation in the
country.
Various initiatives such as global/international and national efforts to combat
desertification are being undertaken to address issues of DLDD. International efforts
started way back in the 1970s when the United Nations Environment Programme
(UNEP) held an international conference on desertification (UNCOD) in Nairobi
Parties adopted a Plan of Action to Combat Desertification (PACD). Also, the UN
Commission observed that desertification had become one of the most serious
environmental and socio-economic problems of the world. The UNCCD was adopted
in Paris on 17 June, 1994 and entered into force on 26 December, 1996. Tanzania
ratified the Convention in 1997.
Since ratification, several national efforts to address the impacts of DLDD, have been
undertaken. The efforts include development of Strategy for Urgent Actions on Land
Degradation and Water Catchment (2006) and the National Strategy on Conservation
of Coastal and Marine Environment, Lakes, Dams and Rivers (2010). The Government
1

--- Page 12 ---
has also developed a National Action Programme to combat DLDD (2014) that
has been aligned to the Ten year Strategy of the UNCCD (2008 – 2018); Status of
Land Degradation (2014); and Compendium of Best Practices for Sustainable Land
Management (2014).
The Environmental Management Act (Cap 191) under section 13(2) gives power to
the Minister responsible for environment, in consultation with other sector ministries,
to issue general guidelines to the Sector Ministries, LGAs and private institution for
the purpose of addressing environmental issues including DLDD. These Guidelines
have been prepared to enable relevant sectors and institutions to identify appropriate
intervention measures that will address DLDD and its impacts so that they are
incorporated in relevant policies, plans, strategies and programmes.
1.2 Objective of The Guidelines
The main objective of these Guidelines is to ensure that relevant policies, plans,
programmes integrate sustainable land management (SLM) with a wider-reaching
set of outcomes towards achieving sustainable development.
1.3 Justification of the Guidelines
In Tanzania, the issues of combating DLDD have been done for so long by sectors
although challenges still exists. Mainstreaming of sustainable land management
(SLM) has been identified to be essential to ensuring the development of policies,
plans and programmes with a wider reaching set of outcomes than if these were
to be undertaken on their own. SLM is a cross cutting issue and therefore holistic
and integrated approach is necessary in addressing challenges posed by land
degradation in the country. Mainstreaming SLM issues into national policies, plans
and programmes ensures consistency between the needs of achieving SLM, poverty
eradication and economic development.
It is against this background that these Guidelines have been developed. The
Guidelines will also contribute to the implementation of the National Environmental
Policy (NEP 1997), Environmental Management Act, (EMA Cap 191), National
Environmental Action Plan (NEAP, 2013 -2018), MKUKUTA II (2010), and the
Multilateral Environmental Agreements (MEAs) and other sectoral Policies Plans
and programmes.
1.4 Scope of the Guidelines
The Guidelines will facilitate mainstreaming of NAP into sectoral policies, plans and
programmes. These sectors include Forestry, Tourism, wildlife, Marine and Coastal,
2

--- Page 13 ---
Energy, Mining, Fisheries, Livestock, Water, Agriculture, Land use and Health. These
guidelines are intended to be used by sectors as well as civil society organizations
and private sector.
1.5 Methodology of Preparing the Guidelines
These Guidelines were prepared in a participatory approach by involving different
stakeholders. The document was drafted by a team of experts from the Vice President’s
Office (VPO). The draft Guidelines were then subjected to a stakeholders’ consultative
workshop for discussion and review with representation from government ministries,
departments and agencies; public and private sectors; civil society organizations;
development partners; and media. The views of stakeholders were incorporated to
finalize the Guidelines.
The draft Guidelines were then tabled and adopted by the Steering Committee.
3

--- Page 14 ---
CHAPTER TWO
INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK
2.1 Introduction
In Tanzania, implementation of the United Nations Convention to Combat
Desertification (UNCCD) is guided by the National Environmental Policy (1997);
Environmental Management Act, Cap 191; and sectoral policies and legislation.
This Chapter describes issues of policy, legal and institutional framework for the
implementation and management of environment in the context of combating DLDD.
2.2 Policy Framework
The overall policy framework for environmental management in Tanzania is provided
by the National Environmental Policy (1997). The Policy recognizes environment as
a cross–cutting issue that requires a holistic approach and multi–level engagement.
In this perspective, the Policy addresses land degradation by involving sectors,
LGAs and other stakeholders.
In addition, sectoral policies does contribute in addressing DLDD within respective
sectors and offer an opportunity for enhancing national efforts in combating DLDD.
2.3 Legal Framework
The Environmental Management Act, Cap 191 provides for legal and institutional
framework for environmental management in the country. The Act requires sector
ministries and LGAs to establish Environmental management units which, among
others, will address issues of DLDD. Furthermore, Section 179 -181 of the Act gives
mandate to the Minister responsible for environment to coordinate implementation
of Multilateral Environmental Agreements (MEAs) in the country to which Tanzania
is a Party including the UNCCD.
2.4 Institutional Framework
Environmental management needs effective, efficient coordination and cooperation
among organs of the government and other key stakeholders. Environmental
Management Act Cap. 191 has stipulated the following institutional arrangement
responsible for environmental management in Tanzania including issues of
combating DLDD (Figure 1).
4

--- Page 15 ---
Vice President’s Office
[Minister Responsible for Environment]
Division of Environment
[Director of Environment]
National Environment National Environmental
Management Council (NEMC) Advisory Committee (NEAC)
[Director General]
Sector Ministry Environmental Sections
[Sector Environment Coordinator]
Regional Secretariat
[Regional Environmental Management Experts]
City Co uncil Mu
[M
n
u
ic
n
i
i
p
c
a
ip
l
a
C
l
o
E
u
n
n
v.
c il
(To
T
w
o
n
w
C
n
o
C
u
o
n
u
c
n
il
c
E
i
n
l
v.
T
(T
o
o
w
w
n
n
s
s
h
h
i
i
p
p
C
C
o
o
u
u
n
nc
c
i
i
l
l District Council
[City Council Env. Management Officer] Management Officer) Env. Management (District Council Env.
C
M
it
a
y
n
E
a
C n
g
v o
e
. m
m
M m
e
a
n
i n t
t
t a e
O
g e
f
e
fi
m
ce
e
r
n
]
t M M u C a n o n i m c a i g p m e a i m t l t E e e e n n v t . Tow M C n a o n C m a o g m u e n i m t c te i e l e n E t n v. E T n o v w C . n M o
O
s m h a
ff
i n
i
m p
c
a
e
i C g t
r
t
)
e e o m e u n e c n il t
M
D
a
is
n
t M
a
r C i
g
c a
e
o t n
m
m C a o g
e
m e u
n
i m
t
n t t c e
O
e i e l n
f
E
f
t
i c
n
e
v
r
.
)
Ward Ward
(Ward Env.
(Ward Env. Management Management Officer)
Officer) Ward Environmental
Ward Envi ronmental Management Committee
Management Committee
Village
Mtaa
(Village Env. Management
(Mtaa Env. Management Officer) Officer)
Mtaa Environmental Village Environmental
Management Committee Management Committee
Kitongoji
(Kitongoji Env.
Management Officer)
Kitongoji Environmental
Management Committee
Figure 1: Institutional arrangement for environmental management in Tanzania
5

--- Page 16 ---
a) National Environmental Advisory Committee
The Committee has been established to advise the Minister responsible for
environment or any sector ministry on environmental matters. Section 11 and 12 of
EMA, 2004 respectively stipulate the composition and functions of the committee. It
offers an opportunity to elevate and address the issue of DLDD as a national agenda.
b) Minister Responsible for Environment
The Minister is responsible for articulation of policy guidelines necessary for
protection, promotion and sustainable management of environment in Tanzania
including issues of DLDD. The Minister may issue general guidelines to sector
Ministries, Government Departments, City, Municipal or District Environmental
Management Committee, Agency or any other public or Private Institution necessary
for the purpose of addressing environmental issues including DLDD.
The Vice President’s Office (VPO) is the national focal point for the United Nations
Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD). Implementation of activities under
this convention enhances sustainable land management in Tanzania. At the national
level, SLM Steering Committee has been established chaired by the Permanent
Secretary of the VPO that provide policy guidelines to the UNCCD Focal Point and
the UNCCD Technical Committee to ensure coordinated actions and participation
of various sectors in the planning and implementation of UNCCD activities in the
country.
c) National Environment Management Council (NEMC)
The function of NEMC, among others, is to oversee the enforcement of EMA, 2004
which includes enforcement and compliance; review and monitoring of Environmental
Impact Assessment (EIA) and Environmental Audits; undertake programs to enhance
environmental education and public awareness; and render advise and technical
support to entities engaged in natural resources and environmental management.
d) Sector Ministries
The duties of sector Ministries to manage the environment are highlighted under
section 30 (b) of EMA Cap 191 which provides for the ensuring all environmental
matters contained in other written laws falling under the sector ministry are
implemented.
The functions of each sector Ministry among others is to ensure that NAP is
mainstreamed into sector functions. Each sector ministry carries out its functions
and duties in accordance with EMA, 2004 and any other related laws, provided that
such laws do not conflict with EMA as per section 232 of that Act.
6

--- Page 17 ---
e) Regional Secretariat
The major responsibilities of Regional Secretariat is to coordinate all advice
on environmental management in their respective regions (Section 34 of EMA,
2004). Section 35 of the Act provides for appointment or designation of a Regional
Environment Management Expert (REME). REME is charged with responsibilities to
advise the local government authorities of that particular region on matters relating
to implementation and enforcement of EMA. REME links the Region and the Director
of Environment.
f) Local Government Authorities
The Environmental Management Act, Cap. 191 empowers LGAs to oversee
environmental management in their areas of jurisdiction as stipulated under sections
36 to 41 of the Act. The Act further empowers LGAs to designate/appoint Environment
Management Officers to oversee implementation of EMA at their respective levels
(City, Municipality, District and Town). The duties of the LGAs to manage the
environment are also provided by Local Government Authorities Act No 7 and 8 of
1982. The LGAs, among other duties, are responsible for addressing DLDD issues
in their area of jurisdictions.
7

--- Page 18 ---
CHAPTER THREE
STATUS OF LAND DEGRADATION AND INITIATIVES
TO COMBAT LAND DEGRADATION IN
TANZANIA
3.1 Status of Land Degradation
Land is a natural resource in which majority of people in the country depend on for
their livelihood. However, human actions among other factors have largely contributed
to land degradation which has been associated with decreasing land quality and
value. In Tanzania land degradation, which is due to unsustainable land management
practices, is threatening the social and economic development as well as livelihoods.
The consequences of land degradation are numerous and serious including reduced
productivity, food insecurity, loss of income and livelihoods, destruction of important
ecosystems, loss of biodiversity through changes to habitats and human migration.
3.1.1 Land cover change
Based on the Land degradation report of 2014, there is a detected land cover change
based on the analysis conducted for 1980 and 2012. This analysis of 22 years (1980-
2012) shows that the total area of bush land in Tanzania has decreased from 19.0%
to 17.0%, cultivated lands have increased from 11.0% to 13.0%, with an increasing
percent change of 2.0. Similarly, there has been an increase in grassland probably
from reduced bush lands and increased fallow from 19.0% to 23.0%. Further analysis
shows a decreasing trend of the woodlands from 41.0% to 36.0%. The increasing and
decreasing trends of land use/cover changes are very clear for the category of bush
lands, grasslands, cultivated land, as well as woodlands. The decrease in woodland
cover has contributed to increased land degradation especially in agro ecological
zones with high rate of deforestation.
3.1.2 Soil fertility and crop production
Declining soil fertility was perceived as the major indicator of land degradation in
the studied areas. The most affected areas were observed in alluvial agro-ecological
zone, especially in Usangu Basin where there is deterioration in the fertile Black
Mbuga soils of the Western Wetland. The same situation was observed in Northern
highlands, various areas of Karatu district. Further evidence of decline in soil fertility
has also been reported in Mbeya region, along the foot and slopes of Mporoto
Mountains. In the arid and semi-arid areas decline of soil fertility have been
experienced in various localities in Chamwino and Kondoa districts. The decline
8

--- Page 19 ---
of soil fertility is manifested by the increasing amounts of fertilizers application per
acreage. For instance, farmers in Karatu district reported that fertilizers application
for onion production has increased from an average of one to three bags of 50 kg
in the 2000 to eight to ten bags per acre in the 2013, and that of rice and maize has
increased from zero to 4 bags per acre; depending on the location of farms and the
type of soil.
3.1.3 Salinization
It is estimated that some 17,000 km2 (2% of the total land area) of Tanzania are naturally
affected by salinity, attributed to low rainfall, inherent soil properties and land form.
It is also estimated that that salinization has affected 20 to 55% of irrigation schemes
in Kilimanjaro, Tanga and Mtwara. In the arid and semi-arid agro-ecological zones
where there is potential for irrigation agriculture there is also a potential for increasing
secondary salinity and alkalinity in the affected areas. Soil analysis conducted in
Bahi and Chali in Dodoma region show that there is high alkaline condition in the
Bahi and Chali irrigation schemes. In Singida region, salinization has also been
observed around Mgori dam. Some areas in the coastal agro-ecological zone such
as Mkurunga and part of Bagamoyo have also been affected by salinization.
Salinization has some effects on soil productivity, crop yields and other economic
activities in three different ways: through salinity, sodicity and toxicity. High
concentrations of salt leads to reduced crop growth and yield losses since the osmotic
pressure causes water scarcity in the cells. Sodicity, the presence of excessive
sodium, deteriorates soil structure and reduces water penetration into and through
the soil. A good example of the effect of salinization were observed in some areas of
Bagamoyo where it has resulted to the disappearance of some crops such as banana
and reduction in commercial seed weed productivity due to sea water temperature/
salinity. Salinization has also resulted to decline in fish catch and intrusion of salt
water in the traditionally used fresh wells.
3.1.4 Soil erosion
Land degradation through soil erosion is a major threat to sustainable use of soil and
water resources in the country. The threat is more serious for soils that are highly
susceptible to erosion and other derivative processes.
Soil erosion has been and continues to be serious problem in the arid and semi-
arid areas where deforestation, shifting cultivation and bushfires is practiced. In
Dodoma region in Mpwawa, Kondoa and Kongwa districts soil erosion is alarming.
Similar situation is experienced in some areas of Tanga, Shinyanga, Ruvuma, Mbeya,
9

--- Page 20 ---
Kilimanjaro and other regions in the country where erosion has advanced to terrain
deformation. This calls for special attention to address the problem.
3.1.5 Soil acidification
Soil acidification is a problem in large parts of the country, and in particular in the
southern part of the coastal agro-ecological zones in Mtwara and Lindi regions
(FAO, 2004). Soil acidification is associated with the dusting of large quantities of
elemental sulfur upon cashew trees aimed at controlling powdery mildew disease,
and with an excessive use of nitrogenous fertilizers in maize fields. Soil acidification
reduces the productivity of poor and fragile soils by increasing soil acidity, leaching
of basic action nutrients (such as Ca, Mg and K), increasing toxic elements in the
soil (particularly aluminum), reducing biological nitrogen fixation and creating
detrimental conditions for microbial organisms. Soil acidification may also cause
aluminum toxicity once the pH drops to below around 4.5. Aluminum is toxic to
roots of most cultivated plants, such that root length is drastically reduced restricting
exploration of soil nutrients and water.
3.1.6 Siltation
In semi-arid areas soil erosion is a serious problem since fertile soil is eroded and
transported away from cultivated areas and the fact that the soil is trapped in reservoirs.
Examples include Mgori Dam in Singida and Mabayani Dam in Tanga. Soil erosion
from cultivated and pasture land is causing serious increases in sediment and nutrient
loads getting into water sources. Siltation causes pollution and drying up of water
sources. This is common in most of the areas where water sources are available and
farming is done upstream. Siltation has detrimental effect to hydropower production
dams. This has been the case in Mtera and Nyumba ya Mungu Dams. Deforestation
on the upper parts of Mt. Kilimanjaro and the Pare Mountains as well as inappropriate
farming practices around Lake Jipe is contributing to land degradation and siltation
of these water reservoirs.
3.1.7 Loss of vegetation
Clearing of forest for crops is one of the most common reasons for loss of vegetation
cover in the country. The extent of vegetation loss in country differs from one
agro-ecological to another. In the west of Arusha (northern semi-arid lands), the
natural vegetation in the area has been considerably destroyed by human activity,
and pressure on grazing land has been increasing yearly, resulting in continued
depletion of the vegetation. The area most critically affected lies in the rain shadow
of Mt. Meru where the soil is composed of very light volcanic ash blown westward
by the prevailing wind. Wind erosion is a very serious problem in these areas, while
10

--- Page 21 ---
soil erosion and deposition is rapidly leading to the siltation of the reservoir dams
constructed in the western area.
3.1.8 Soil pollution
Pollution is becoming an increasingly serious problem in the major mining areas.
Such areas include the gold mining zone around Lake Victoria, Mpanda and Chunya;
coal mining in Kiwira and Ngaka; tin mining in Ngara and Kyerwa Districts; ruby
mining near Morogoro; tanzanite and phosphate mines in Arusha Region; limestone
mines in Dar es Salaam, Tanga and Mbeya Regions; and salt mining along the coastal
belt. With the advent of drilling for natural gas and possibly oil in the coastal zone,
there may be profound negative impact on the environment especially fragile marine
and coastal wetlands.
3.2 Initiatives to Combat Land Degradation
The Government has undertaken various initiatives to curb the situation of land
degradation through implementation of Sustainable Land Management (SLM) plans,
strategies and programmes in the country. These include National Land Use Framework
plan 2011 – 2031; issuing villages guide for participatory planning and management
of village land, 2010; National Agriculture Land Use Planning and Management
Master plan, 2011; Sector Environmental Action Plans; Mainstreaming Environment
into National Strategy for Growth and Poverty Reduction Phase II (MKUKUTA II);
Strategy for Urgent Actions on Land Degradation and Water Catchments, 2006 and
implementing projects and programme for SLM in Katavi, Kilimanjaro and Tabora.
Some of the existing sector specific interventions are summarized in Table 1.
S/N SECTOR INTERVENTION
1. Land and Human i) Land use planning and management
Settlement ii) Preparation of town plans
iii) Housing development plans
2. Agriculture i) Water harvesting techniques for irrigation
ii) Efficient small scale irrigation schemes
iii) Agricultural best practices techniques such as
matengo pits (ngoro)
iv) Terracing and contour farming
v) Use of organic fertilizers
vi) Conservation of water catchments and soil
resources
11

--- Page 22 ---
Table 1: Some of the sector specific interventions to address DLDD
S/N SECTOR INTERVENTION
3. Livestock i) Zero grazing
ii) Marketing and infrastructure
iii) Charcol dam construction
iv) Livestock extension services
v) Traditional fodder conservation (Ngitiri)
vi) Conservation of water catchments and soil
resources
4. Water i) Integrated Water resource management
ii) Rain water harvesting
iii) Exploitation of underground water
iv) Construction of water dams
v) Existence of water user associations and water user
rights
5. Forest i) Participatory forest management (JFM and CBFM)
ii) Indigenous knowledge in forest conservation
iii) Collection of Non-timber forest products
(Medicines, wild fruits and vegetables)
iv) alternative income generating activities such as
butterfly farming and beekeeping
v) Ecosystem conservation
vi) Conservation of water catchments and soil
resources
vii) Agroforestry
viii) Ecotourism
6. Fisheries i) Protection and conservation of aquatic ecosystems
ii) Fish farming practices
iii) Marketing for fish and fish products
iv) Supporting alternative livelihood initiatives for
fisheries communities
v) Management of geographical areas of concerns and
critical habitats
vi) Beach Management Units (BMU)
vii) Monitoring of fisheries species and habitats
viii) Ecotourism
ix) Sea weed farming
x) Research and Development (R&D)
12

--- Page 23 ---
S/N SECTOR INTERVENTION
7. Energy i) Protection of hydropower catchments
ii) Fuel switching
iii) Use efficient energy technologies
iv) Development of alternative energy sources (Solar,
wind and biomass energy)
8. Wildlife i) Conservation of Wildlife resources
ii) Establishment of Wildlife Management Areas
(WMAs)
iii) Involvement of local communities in managing
wildlife resources
iv) Conservation of water catchments and soil
resources
v) Protection of areas of scenic beauty and cultural
values
9. Industries i) Value addition of raw materials
ii) Processing, Marketing and selling
iii) Use of cleaner technologies and production
10. Tourism i) Promoting Ecotourism
ii) Diversification of tourism attractions
11. Coastal and Marine i) Coastal erosion control
ii) Protection and management of mangroves
iii) Protection of coastal forests
iv) Conservation of critical habitats
12. Wetland i) Conservation awareness activities
ii) Restoration of wetlands
iii) Designation of Ramsar sites
iv) Implementation of projects and programmes related
to conservation of wetlands
v) Conservation of water catchments and soil
resources
13. Finance i) Financial Mechanism (VICOBA, SACCOS)
13

--- Page 24 ---
CHAPTER FOUR
GUIDELINES FOR MAINSTREAMING NAP
INTO SECTORAL POLICIES, PLANS AND
PROGRAMMES
4.1 General Guidelines
This Section describes a step by step practical guide for mainstreaming desertification,
land degradation and drought issues into sectoral policies, plans and programmes.
These steps are; sectoral DLDD situational analysis; institutional situational analysis;
identification of potential interventions for mainstreaming DLDD issues for sectors;
setting up sectoral mainstreaming action plans; monitoring and evaluation and
reporting.
4.1.1 Sectoral DLDD Situational Analysis
Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought situational analysis looks at how
the sector is affected, level of vulnerability and how it addresses DLDD challenges.
It intends to support identification of DLDD mainstreaming opportunities of the
sector which can be integrated into respective policies, plans and programmes. The
process should involve the following steps:-
a) Analyze susceptibility to DLDD
i) Document the extent and nature of the sector’s exposure and sensitivity to
DLDD both short and long term plans;
ii) Identify the most important DLDD variables and indicators that the sector
may be sensitive to;
iii) Identify sectoral vulnerability indicators; and
iv) Identify various approaches/tools that may be applied in analyzing sectoral
vulnerability to DLDD. These may include (but not limited to), application
of user friendly tools/approaches available in the UNCCD Portal, Literature
Review, Expert opinion, Land Degradation Trend Analysis, Strategic
Environment Assessment, Evidence Based Approaches and application of
global models
14

--- Page 25 ---
b) Evaluate Sectoral DLDD Impacts
i) Identify existing DLDD measures in the sectors;
ii) Analyze and review sectoral Policy, Plans and Programmes to identify
gaps; and
iii) Evaluate appropriateness of existing SLM Best Practices option for the
sectors by reviewing different studies and involving key stakeholders in
identifying, using and up scaling best practices from other areas
c) Analyze Sectoral DLDD Impacts
i) Identify and document the past DLDD impacts affecting the sector;
ii) Identify and analyze impacted areas (thematic and geographical); and
iii) Identify the challenges and opportunities emanating from DLDD impacts
in the sector.
4.1.2 Institution Situation Analysis
This can be done through the following:-
i) Provide overview of institutional arrangement including administration, roles,
responsibilities, and existence of Sectoral Environment Section. A sector
organization chart (organogram) should be included.
ii) Analyze the institution adequacy in relation to realization of mainstreaming NAP
objectives by undertaking institutional analysis on the Strength, Weakness,
Opportunities and Challenges using a SWOC analysis approach in terms of
human resources, finance, institutional arrangement/organization, technology,
legislation and awareness; and
iii) Undertake the analysis of sectoral linkages with and involvement of key
stakeholders in combating DLDD. Such key stakeholders may include MDAs,
LGAs, Private Sector, CSOs , Education Institutions and Bilateral International/
Regional Organizations.
4.1.3 Potential Interventions for Integrating NAP in sectoral Policies,
Plans and Programs
Based on the reviewed Sector Policy, Programmes, Plans and Strategies as well as
identified potential sectoral DLDD and Institutional Situation Analysis as Clarified in
sections 4.2 and 4.3:
15

--- Page 26 ---
i) Provide/suggest potential interventions for combating desertification at each
level (Policy, Strategy, Plans and Programmes) and measures for enhancing
institutional combating desertification capacity in areas such as human
resources, finance, institutional arrangement/organization, technology,
legislation and awareness;
ii) Integrate the proposed interventions into Sectoral Policy, Strategy, Plans and
programmes;
iii) Consider other cross cutting issues including gender, science and technology
and vulnerable groups while integrating these interventions into Policy, Plans
and Programme;
iv) In the course of integration, reference should be made to various documents
such as Tanzania Development Vision, 2025; Five Year Development Plan,
2011; National Strategy for Growth and Reduction of Poverty II, 2010;, National
Environmental Policy, 1997; Environmental Management Act, Cap 191;
National Adaptation Programme of Action, 2007; National Adaptation Strategy
and Action plan, 2009; National Women and Gender Development Policy, 2000;
and other relevant sectoral policy documents;
v) Establish sustainable financial mechanisms to address DLDD issues; and
vi) Disseminate/communicate DLDD interventions integrated into policy, plan and
programmes to key stakeholders.
4.2 Sector Potential Interventions for Mainstreaming NAP
This Chapter provides framework guidelines for mainstreaming NAP into Government
policies, programmes and plans. This includes macro-economic development plans
and strategies as well as sectoral policies, plans and strategies.
Mainstreaming NAP guidelines developed following a review of the policies,
programmes and plans in which priorities, opportunities and gaps for improvement
in the context of DLDD were identified. These provided platform for achieving
Sustainable Land Management (SLM) in Tanzania
4.2.1 National Development Plans and Strategies (Finance)
a) Macro-economic Framework
Tanzania Development Vision 2025: The Vision seeks to transform Tanzania into a
middle-income country by the year 2025, with a per capita income of USD 3,000 (in
16

--- Page 27 ---
nominal terms) by 2025. It is envisioned that the following specific achievements
would be attainable by the year 2025: high quality livelihood; good governance and
the rule of law; and a strong and competitive economy.
Second National Strategy for Growth and Reduction of Poverty (NSGRP II) (2010-
2015): The Strategy emphasizes on: prioritization of interventions in key priority
growth and poverty reduction sectors; strengthening evidence based planning and
resource allocation in the priority interventions; aligning strategic plans of Ministries,
Departments and Agencies (MDAs) and Local Government Authorities (LGAs) to this
strategy; scaling up the role and participation of the private sector in priority areas
of growth and poverty reduction; mainstreaming cross cutting issues in MDAs and
LGAs processes; strengthening the monitoring and reporting systems; and better
implementation of core reforms, including further improvement of public financial
management systems .
Tanzania Five Year Development Plan (TFYDP-I) (2011/12-2015/16): The Plan targets
five core priorities to unleash Tanzania’s latent growth potentials. They include: (i)
Infrastructure, and in particular large investments in energy, transport infrastructure
(ports, railways, roads, air transport), water and sanitation and ICT; (ii) agriculture,
focusing on the transformation of agriculture for food self-sufficiency and export,
development of irrigation particularly in selected agricultural corridors, and high
value crops including horticulture, floriculture, spices, vineyards etc.; (iii) industrial
development specifically targeting industries that use locally produced raw materials
such as textiles, fertilizer, cement, coal, iron and steel, as well as development of
special economic zones, using public-private partnerships; (iv) human capital and
skills development, with an emphasis on science, technology and innovation; and (v)
tourism, trade and financial services.
b) NAP Mainstreaming Guidelines
i) Facilitate transformation of the economy from a predominantly agricultural
one with low productivity to a diversified and semi-industrialized economy
with a modern rural sector and high productivity in agricultural production;
ii) Integrate environmental dimension in economic planning by taking into
consideration the impact and the cost of environment in macro-economic
planning;
iii) Provide enabling environment such as infrastructure (especially energy,
transport and communications), human resources and legal frameworks
geared towards stimulating economic activity and private investment;
17

--- Page 28 ---
iv) Support accelerated development and deployment of new technologies
that address DLDD impacts; and
v) Promote science and technology education.
4.2.2 Agriculture
a) Policies and Plans
National Agriculture Policy (2013): The Policy emphasizes that for long term future of
the country, the natural resources (land, soil, water and forests) must be managed so
that agriculture is sustained. Some of the relevant policy interventions of relevance
to DLDD are to: promote intensification and diversification of agriculture production;
soil erosion control and soil fertility improvement; minimize encroachment in public
lands including forests, woodlands, wetlands and pasture; strengthen agrochemical
monitoring and registration; promote agro-forestry and organic farming; minimize
pollution of both surface and ground water; improve water use efficiency in irrigation;
and intensify plant genetic conservation programmes.
National Irrigation Policy (2010): The main objective is to ensure sustainable
availability of irrigation water and its efficient use for enhanced crop production,
productivity and profitability that will contribute to food security and poverty reduction.
Agricultural Sector Development Strategy (ASDS) (2001): The primary objective of the
ASDS is to create an enabling and conducive environment for improving profitability
of the agricultural sector as the basis for improved farm incomes and rural poverty
reduction in the medium and long-term. The ASDS address the following critical
issues: institutional framework for managing agricultural development; private
sector participation; improving net farm returns and commercializing agriculture;
and mainstreaming planning for agricultural development in other sectors
Agricultural Sector Development Programmes (ASDP): The ASDP provides the
operational instrument for implementing the ASDS. It mobilizes incremental
resources for the sector in a coordinated manner, facilitates ASDS implementation,
and brings added-value to the current approaches to sector investment management.
ASDP therefore enhances streamlining of cross-cutting issues and multi-sectoral
activities in agricultural interventions, enhances cross-sectoral coordination to
bring synergies between agricultural and other sectors and monitors progress and
assesses impact of interventions to achieve ASDS and PRSP targets, and shares
information with stakeholders.
“Kilimo Kwanza” Declaration (2009): is a national resolve to accelerate agricultural
transformation. It comprises a holistic set of policy instruments and strategic
18

--- Page 29 ---
interventions towards addressing various sectoral challenges and taking advantage of
the numerous opportunities to modernize and commercialize agriculture in Tanzania.
The implementation of KILIMO KWANZA revolves around ten pillars, namely
i) Political will to push our agricultural transformation;
ii) Enhanced financing for agriculture;
iii) Institutional reorganization and management of agriculture;
iv) Paradigm shift to strategic agricultural production;
v) Land availability for agriculture;
vi) Incentives to stimulate investments in agriculture;
vii) Industrialization for agricultural transformation;
viii) Science, technology and human resources to support agricultural transformation;
ix) Infrastructure development to support agricultural transformation; and
x) Mobilization of Tanzanians to support and participate in the implementation of
KILIMO KWANZA.
Tanzania Agriculture Food Security Investiment Plan (TAFSIP): The goal of the
TAFSIP is to “contribute to the national economic growth, household income and
food security in line with national and sectoral development aspirations”. It aims to
“rationalize allocation of resources to achieve annual 6% agricultural GDP growth,
consistent with national objectives to reduce rural poverty and improve household
food and nutrition security”. TAFSIP consider cross cutting issues include but not
limited to (i) empowerment of vulnerable groups; (ii) gender equality and equity, (iii)
conservation farming practices, (iv) control of air and water pollution; other issues
are also recognized in the framework.
Southern Agriculture Growth Corridor of Tanzania (SAGCOT) (2010): The objectives
of the SAGCOT Program are to have long-term positive socio-economic impacts
throughout the Corridor, focused on priority clusters. Through the Catalytic Fund,
the Project aims to provide opportunities for smallholder producers to engage in
profitable agriculture, support agribusiness investment and development along
the value chain, and build supply chains which include smallholder and emergent
farmers and benefit rural communities. However, the SAGCOT Program is also likely
to have significant environmental and social impacts associated with the numerous
development challenges in the region and the Corridor’s important biodiversity and
ecosystem services. Such concerns must raise the level of scrutiny for all development
schemes in the Corridor.
19

--- Page 30 ---
b) NAP Mainstreaming Guidelines
i) Integrate implementation of ‘KILIMO KWANZA’ in relevant national plans
and strategies and carry out Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) to
ensure environmental issues are adequately integrated;
ii) Promote value addition to agricultural products and strengthen linkage
between agriculture and industry and increase access to local and foreign
markets for value added products;
iii) Strengthen the production of non-traditional export commodities to
enhance the diversification of agriculture;
iv) Expand organic farming and other environmentally friendly agricultural
production systems;
v) Promote development and application agricultural genetic modification to
contribute in improving in productivity while ensuring that the introduction
of GMO crops (laboratory research, confined field trial and commercial
release) adhere to national biosafety regulatory framework;
vi) Expand and improve irrigation infrastructure;
vii) Use of appropriate low cost technologies blended with modern affordable
technologies like drip and sprinkler irrigation systems and the use of wind
and solar power for pumping water;
viii) Ease availability and enhance utilization of modern agricultural inputs and
mechanization;
ix) Up scaling the SLM best Practices ;
x) Establish and strengthen Financial mechanisms for combating DLDD;
xi) Strengthen early warning system;
xii) Integrate DLDD and environmental issues in educational curricula of
agricultural training institutes; and
xiii) Strengthen the linkage between research and agricultural extension; and
20

--- Page 31 ---
4.2.3 Livestock
a) Policies and Plans
National Livestock Policy of 2006: The overall objective of the Policy is to develop a
competitive and more efficient livestock industry that contributes to the improvement
of the well being of the people whose principal occupation and livelihood is based on
livestock. The specific objectives of the National Livestock Policy are to:-
i) Contribute towards national food security through increased production,
processing and marketing of livestock products to meet national nutritional
requirements;
ii) Improve standards of living of people engaged in the livestock industry through
increased income generation from livestock;
iii) Increase the quantity and quality of livestock and livestock products as raw
materials for local industry and export;
iv) Promote integrated and sustainable use and management of natural resources
related to livestock production in order to achieve environmental sustainability;
v) Strengthen technical support services, develop and disseminate new
technologies;
vi) Develop human resources including livestock farmers;
vii) Promote production of safe and quality foods of animal origin in order to
safeguard consumers;
viii) Promote the use of draught animal power and biogas utilization; and
ix) Mainstream cross-cutting and cross-sectoral issues such as gender, HIV/AIDS,
land and environment.
Livestock Sector Development Strategy (2010): The overall objective of the LSDS is
to develop a competitive and more efficient livestock industry that contributes to the
improvement of the livelihoods of all livestock keepers and the national economy.
The specific objectives of the LSDS as defined under the NLP shall be to:
i) Contribute towards national food security through increased production,
processing and marketing of livestock products to meet national nutritional
requirements;
21

--- Page 32 ---
ii) Improve living standards of the people engaged in the livestock industry
through increased income generation from livestock;
iii) Increase the quantity and quality of livestock and livestock products as raw
materials for local industry and for export;
iv) Promote integrated and sustainable use and management of natural resources
related to livestock production in order to achieve environmental sustainability;
v) Promote production of safe and quality foods of animal origin in order to
safeguard health of consumers;
Livestock Sector Development Programmes (2011): The overall goal of the LSDP
is to increase food security, stakeholder’s incomes and contribution to the national
economy. The purpose of the programme is to improve the livelihoods of the livestock
farmers (pastoralists and agropastoralists) by enhancing the delivery of livestock
inputs and services to livestock farmers; improving marketing infrastructure and
marketing systems for livestock and livestock products; strengthening the capacity
of livestock farming communities and the private sector; and strengthen national and
local government institutions to provide services to the livestock sector.
b) NAP Mainstreaming Guidelines
i) Increase production, processing and marketing of livestock products to
meet national nutritional requirements;
ii) Improve living standards of the people engaged in the livestock industry
through increased income generation from livestock;
iii) Increase the quantity and quality of livestock and livestock products as raw
materials for local industry and for export;
iv) Promote integrated and sustainable use and management of natural
resources related to livestock production in order to achieve environmental
sustainability;
v) Promote production of safe and quality foods of animal origin in order to
safeguard health of consumers;
vi) Enhance development of livestock infrastructure;
vii) Enhances integrated rangeland management;
viii) Upscale SLM best practices in Livestock development; and
ix) Establish and strengthen Financial mechanisms for combating DLDD
22

--- Page 33 ---
4.2.4 Water
a) Policies and Plans
National Water Policy (2002): The main objective of the Policy is to develop a
comprehensive framework for sustainable development and management of the
water resources, in which an effective legal and institutional framework for its
implementation will be put in place. The Policy embodies the principle that water
basins should be the planning and management units rather than regions, and the
principles of decentralization of water supply management to the lowest appropriate
level.
National Water Sector Development Strategy (NWSDS) (2005-2015): The main
objective of the NWSDS is to develop a coherent, holistic and integrated strategy for
the water sector. The Strategy promotes inter-sectoral linkages of water resources
management through public education and awareness programmes as well
encouraging inclusion in the education curricula.
b) NAP Mainstreaming Guidelines
i) Identify, protect, demarcate and acquire land title deeds for water sources
and infrastructure;
ii) Classify all water sources on the basis of quality and quantity, and
determine and allocate minimum water requirements for ecosystem needs
for all regulated and unregulated water sources;
iii) Promote use of environmentally friendly technologies including gravity,
solar and wind power for water pumping;
iv) Enforce the “polluter pays” principle in conjunction with other legal and
administrative actions that promote water conservation;
v) Encourage and facilitate industries to adopt cleaner production technologies
and techniques;
vi) Promote safe and affordable off-site waste management services (sewerage
and sludge collection, treatment and reuse/disposal) for densely populated
areas;
vii) Ensure that industries pre-treat their wastewater before discharging into
municipal sewerage system;
23

--- Page 34 ---
viii) Institute comprehensive water quality monitoring and assessment to
identify extent and status of the quality of the water resources;
ix) Promote and facilitate reuse of wastewater whenever appropriate in
different economic sectors;
x) Implement improved sanitation for schools, health facilities and other
public institutions and locations;
xi) Enhance storm water management to mitigate impacts on properties,
infrastructure, human and the environment;
xii) Promote Integrated Water Resource Management (IWRM);
xiii) Promote and upscale SLM best practices such as rain water harvesting for
domestic, agriculture and industrial use; and
xiv) Establish and strengthen Financial mechanisms for combating DLDD.
4.2.5 Energy
a) Policy and Plans
National Energy Policy (2003): The Policy aims at ensuring availability of reliable
and affordable energy supplies and their use in a rational and sustainable manner in
order to support national development goals. The goal of the Policy is to establish
an efficient energy production, procurement, transportation, distribution and end use
systems in an environmentally sound and sustainable manner.
b) NAP Mainstreaming Guidelines
i) Promote efficient woodfuel conversion and utilization technologies such
as improved charcoal production technology, improved cooking stoves,
use of bio-waste, and biogas production;
ii) Provide economically justified feed-in tariffs or other mechanisms to
give incentives and reduce risks for electricity production from renewable
sources;
iii) Promote research and development efforts aimed at dissemination of
energy technology for rural development;
iv) Promote use of clean coal energy and natural gas for domestic, industrial
and commercial applications;
24

--- Page 35 ---
v) Promote power trading with neighbouring countries; Promote sustainable
production and utilization of bio-energy to improve energy security;
vi) Encourage and promote energy efficiency in all sectors;
vii) Institute energy pricing with due regard to social and environmental costs
Conduct and/or encourage energy audits particularly in energy intensive
industries;
viii) Encourage community investment and ownership of energy systems e.g.
solar farms, windmills and woodlots;
ix) Use of the Clean Development Mechanism to facilitate the development of
environmentally sound energy and reduction of emission;
x) Promote co-generation of power by exploiting the biomass potential;
xi) Promote SLM best practices such as wind power and solar power; and
xii) Establish and strengthen Financial mechanisms for combating DLDD.
4.2.6 Industry
a) Policies and Plans
Sustainable Industrial Development Policy (SIDP) (1996): The major goal of the
Policy is to promote the sustainable productive base which maximizes the growth
rate and sustainability of economic growth. Emphasis is given to development
of intermediate and capital goods industries as agents for enhancing sustainable
productivity, technological progression as well as structural transformation
and integration. Furthermore, the Policy promotes environmentally friendly and
ecologically sustainable industrial development.
Integrated Industrial Development Strategy 2025 (IIDS 2025): The aim of the Strategy
is to enhance industrialization under the newly emerging economic environment
and contribute to the realization of targets stipulated in Tanzania Development
Vision (TDV) 2025. The Strategy targets four sub-sectors, in view of comparative
advantages, length of value chain and availability of resources, and these are:
fertilizer and chemicals; iron and steel; textile; agro-processing; edible oil; cashew
nut processing; fruit processing; milk and milk products; leather and leather products;
light machinery; and hospitality industry. The Strategy targets an average growth of
manufacturing sector of 15% and to increase its contribution to GDP from 9% in
2010 to 23% in 2025.
25

--- Page 36 ---
Small and Medium Enterprise (SMEs) Development Policy (2003): The overall
objective of the SMEs Development Policy is to foster job creation and income
generation through promoting the creation of new SMEs and improving the
performance and competitiveness of the existing ones.
National Trade Policy (2003): The policy goal is to facilitate smooth integration into
the multilateral Trading System (MTS) and roll back the gradual descent towards
marginalization. It is intended to ensure that trade liberalization offer meaningful,
identifiable and measurable benefits. The policy emphases trading while protecting
the environment by encouraging growth and development to be sustainable and
optimal use of the world’s renewable and non-renewable resources.
b) NAP Mainstreaming Guidelines
i) Promote clustering (industrial packs) at every level and every feasible
location to accelerate growth dynamism and to improve efficiency of
industries;
ii) Evaluate infrastructure needs of new industries and how they can be
integrated into existing policies on infrastructure;
iii) Encourage investment in industries that utilize local resources;
iv) Promote rural industrialization through promotion of SMEs and up-
grading of rural enterprises so as to add value to agro-products;
v) Enhance supply chain linkages between SMEs and export oriented
enterprises;
vi) Promote environmentally friendly or resource efficient industrial
production/manufacturing;
vii) Encourage minimization of use of energy intensive process steps such as
high heating differentials, heavy motors and extensive cooling in order to
reduce the amount of energy needed by the production process;
viii) Support investigation of external markets for recycling by other industrial
processing operations located in the neighborhood or region (e.g., waste
exchange);
ix) Promote and facilitate innovation and creativity in enhancing sustainability
of industries;
26

--- Page 37 ---
x) Promote industrial investments which integrate pollution prevention
programmes;
xi) Ensure that environmental considerations are given due emphasis in all
SME development interventions;
xii) Enhance networking between R&D Institutions and SMEs to upgrade
technologies so as to raise the productivity and competitiveness of the
sector;
xiii) Facilitate adoption of production/manufacturing technologies which utilize
renewable energy;
xiv) Emphasis use of clean technology (eco-labeling) in manufacturing process
and energy efficiency in goods and service with less toxic outputs; and
xv) Facilitate establishment or strengthening of a development fund for
technology upgrading of production processes of firms with a national
and international value chain.
xvi) Upscale SLM best practices in Industry development (value addition,
spice industry, fruit processing etc); and
xvii) Establish and strengthen Financial mechanisms for combating DLDD
4.2.7 Tourism
a) Policy
National Tourism Policy, 1999: The Policy acknowledges the relationship between
the environment and development of sustainable tourism. Thus, it aims to ensure
that development of tourism is based on careful assessment of carrying capacities
of tourism products. It also ensures enhancement and improvement of special
environment features in order that tourism development does not conflict with
indigenous forests, beaches, mountains and other important types of vegetation.
b) NAP Mainstreaming Guidelines
i) Institute environmental management plans for each tourist attraction;
ii) Support and promote ecotourism projects. Eg conservation and promotion
of cultural heritage sites in order to decrease pressure in every impacted
areas;
27

--- Page 38 ---
iii) Ensure negative impacts of tourism on the natural and cultural environment
are avoided or minimized through the responsible use of resources,
effective waste management and minimizing pollution;
iv) Recognize best practices in tourism through awards, certification and
accreditation programmes;
v) Promote participatory approach in planning and decision making,
development and delivery of tourism programmes and services;
vi) Support strategies that would ensure the informal sector benefits more
from tourism;
vii) Promote mutual use of facilities and services by local communities and
tourists;
viii) Support visits by local school children to tourism sites that promote and
display their heritage;
ix) Upscale SLM best practices in tourism development; and
x) Establish and strengthen Financial mechanisms for combating DLDD
4.2.8 Forestry
a) Policy Framework
National Forest Policy, 1998: The overall goal of the Policy (1998) is to enhance
the contribution of the forest sector to the sustainable development of Tanzania and
the conservation and management of her natural resources for the benefit of present
and future generations. The Policy, among other aspects, recognizes the high value
of forests due to the high potential for royalty collection, earnings from exportation
of forest products and tourism as well as sequestering of carbon. Furthermore,
the policy emphasizes on biodiversity conservation and describes the importance
of forest ecosystems for maintaining biodiversity. Broadly, the policy focuses
on ensured ecosystem stability through conservation of forest biodiversity, water
catchments, and soil fertility.
b) NAP Mainstreaming Guidelines
i) Promote integrated watershed management approaches;
ii) Promote afforestation and reforestation (A&R) programmes to generate
and regenerate forests which are critical for environmental protection and
reduction of land degradation;
28

--- Page 39 ---
iii) Support diversification in forest utilization especially through promotion
of non-consumptive use of forests such as eco-tourism and beekeeping;
iv) Integrate carbon sequestration and the provision of carbon sinks in the
planning, management, utilization and monitoring of forests;
v) Institute forest monitoring mechanisms for potential risks of insects,
diseases, invasive alien species and fire;
vi) Institute certification mechanism for promoting environmental
conservation;
vii) Promote development of ecotourism in protected areas like nature reserves,
to generate income for local and national benefits;
viii) Facilitate economic and market valuation to better recognize the full
range of goods (wood, fiber, bioenergy, non-wood forest products) and
environmental services (storage of carbon, conservation of biological
diversity, protection of soil and water and provision of ecotourism,
recreation and amenity value) from forests;
ix) Promote equitable sharing of benefits from forest resources among the
stakeholders; Facilitate integration of the full value of forest goods and
services in planning, management, monitoring and reporting, particularly
by central government and local authorities;
x) Promote development of viable and efficient forest-based industries,
particularly in secondary and tertiary processingfor full utilization of
forest products, reduce excessive waste and satisfy domestic and export
demand. through appropriate incentives;
xi) Introduce performance bonds for forest harvesting to improve best practice
and to ensure responsible management;
xii) Promote SLM best practices such as CBFM, JFM and Traditional Forest
Management; and
xiii) Establish and strengthen Financial mechanisms for combating DLDD.
29

--- Page 40 ---
4.2.9 Mining
a) Policy Framework
Mineral Policy of Tanzania, 2009: One of the objectives of the Policy is to reduce or
eliminate adverse environmental effects of mining by promoting health and safety
conditions in mining areas and addressing social issues affecting local communities.
It requires mining operations to carry out Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA)
and directs mining companies to set aside funds for environmental rehabilitation and
mine closure obligations.
b) NAP Mainstreaming Guidelines
i) Promote efficient mineral processing for value addition where there is
comparative advantage to do so;
ii) Promote the application of environmentally friendly technologies and
methods in mineral exploitation;
iii) Enhance local capacity for mineral analysis;
iv) Ensure compliance to mine closure plan contained in respective
Environmental Management Plans (EMPs);
v) Establish monitoring programmes and/or early warning systems for the
assessment of potential pollution and for the detection of pollution events
from closed mines;
vi) Provide extension services and facilitate access to appropriate technology,
funding mechanisms and partnerships for artisanal and small scale miners;
and
vii) Encourage corporate social responsibility.
4.2.10 Land
a) Policy Framework
National Land Policy (1997): The overall aim of National Land Policy is to promote
and ensure a secure land tenure system, to encourage the optimal use of land
resources, and to facilitate broad – based social and economic development without
upsetting or endangering the ecological balance of the environment.
30

--- Page 41 ---
b) NAP Mainstreaming Guidelines
i) Promote an equitable distribution of and access to land by all citizens
including vulnerable groups;
ii) Ensure that existing rights in land especially customary rights of small
holders (i.e. peasants and herdsmen who are the majority of the population
in the country) are recognized, clarified and secured in law;
iii) Prevent or avoid the phenomenon of land grabbing;
iv) Ensure that land is put into its most productive use to promote rapid social
and economic development in the country;
v) Modify and streamline the existing land management systems and improve
the efficiency of land delivery systems;
vi) Streamline the institutional arrangements in land administration and land
dispute adjudication and also make them more transparent;
vii) Promote sound land information management system;
viii) Protect resources from degradation for sustainable development; and
ix) Establish and strengthen Financial mechanisms for combating DLDD.
4.2.11 Coastal and Marine
a) Policy Framework
Fisheries Sector Policy and Strategy Statement (1997): The policy acknowledges
the linkage between the sustainable exploitation of fish resources and the provision
of high quality food, income and employment. Though the linkage between poverty
and environment is recognized, the role of poverty as a constraint to sustainable
management of fisheries resources, or possibility of developing positive environment/
poverty linkages, is not highlighted in the policy.
b) NAP Mainstreaming Guidelines
i) Ensure that the Fisheries sector and fishing communities are resented
and / or consulted in the decision making process and involved in other
activities related to coastal area management, planning and development.
ii) Promote the establishment of procedures and mechanism at appropriate
administrative level to settle conflicts which arise within the fisheries
31

--- Page 42 ---
sector and between fisheries resources users and other users of coastal
area.
iii) Facilitate the adoption of fisheries practice that avoid conflict among
fisheries resources users and between them and other users of the coastal
areas.
iv) Promote multidisciplinary research in support of coastal areas management
in particular on its environmental, biological, economic, social, legal and
institutional aspects.
v) Promote the creation of awareness of the need for the protection and
management of coastal resources and the participation in the management
process by those affected;
vi) Promote SLM best practices such as CBFM, JFM and Traditional Forest
Management; and
vii) Establish and strengthen Financial mechanisms for combating DLDD.
4.2.12 Fisheries
a) Policy and Strategies
National Fisheries Sector Policy and Strategy Statement, 1997: The Policy focuses on
the promotion of sustainable exploitation, utilization and marketing of fish resources
to provide food, income, employment and foreign exchange, earnings and effective
protection of the aquatic environment to sustain development.
Fisheries Sector Development Programme (2010): The overall goal of the Fisheries
Sector Development Programme ( FSDP) is to develop a sustainable, competitive and
more efficient fisheries and aquaculture industry that contributes to the improvement
of the livelihoods of stakeholders and the national economy while preserving the
environment. The specific objectives of FSDP are to:
i) Ensure effective fisheries resources management, protection and
ii) conservation;
iii) Strengthen fisheries and aquaculture products utilization and marketing;
iv) Strengthen and support fisheries and aquaculture research, training extension
and information services;
32

--- Page 43 ---
v) Develop and strengthen appropriate fisheries and aquaculture
vi) Infrastructure; and
vii) Promote aquaculture development, management and environmental
conservation.
b) NAP Mainstreaming Guidelines
i) Encourage value addition to fish and fishery products;
ii) Promote environmental friendly fishing gear, methods and practices;
iii) Promote small scale and/or semi intensive aquaculture technologies and
develop necessary infrastructure and support services;
iv) Improve current extension services through public-private partnerships;
v) Institute specification of access rights and controlled access to fisheries
resources;
vi) Encourage sustainable exploitation of under-utilized fisheries;
vii) Promote fisheries co-management approach;
viii) Promote use of appropriate fishery post-harvest handling and processing
technologies;
ix) Discourage land-based activities that have negative impact on biodiversity
in the catchment areas;
x) Ensure protection and rehabilitation of fragile aquatic ecosystems
including wetlands and mangroves which act as fish breeding grounds
and buffer zones;
xi) Protect endangered and threatened aquatic species;
xii) Institute preventive and control measures for the spread of noxious-water
weeds such as water hyacinth;
xiii) Promote SLM best practices in fisheries development; and
xiv) Establish and strengthen Financial mechanisms for combating DLDD.
33

--- Page 44 ---
4.2.13 Wildlife and Wetlands
a) Policy Framework
Wildlife Policy of Tanzania (2007): The Policy focuses on wildlife protection and
conservation in order to ensure sustainability of wildlife ecosystems. Some of the
objectives of the Policy include establishment of Protected Areas (PA); maintenance
and development of a PA network in order to enhance biological diversity; conservation
of wildlife and its habitats outside the core areas by establishing Wildlife Management
Areas (WMAs) conserve water catchments and soil resources, protect areas of scenic
beauty or cultural values and create opportunities for access to natural resources for
enhancement of rural development.
b) NAP Mainstreaming Guidelines
i) Adopt an ecosystem-based management approach to wildlife conservation
and management;
ii) Enhance the use of indigenous knowledge in the conservation and
management of wildlife;
iii) Establish comprehensive wildlife resources database at all management
levels for use in the policy, conservation planning and management
decision-making processes;
iv) Promote the processing of wildlife products locally and their marketing;
v) Encourage diversification of the tourism product base to reduce pressure
on wildlife resources and maximize economic benefits;
vi) Ensure that benefits arising from access to genetic resources such as
intellectual property rights, traditional knowledge and technology are
shared equitably with communities living in areas adjacent to the protected
areas; where the genetic material originated;
vii) Establish collaborative management arrangements and joint ventures
that enhance local community and private sector involvement in the
management of protected areas;
viii) Ensure conservation of wetlands for water storage, distribution, filtration
and purification;
ix) Promote gender equity in sustainable management, conservation,
utilization and development of wildlife and wetlands resources;
34

--- Page 45 ---
x) Regulate the importation of exotic species and the re-introduction of
species including genetically modified organisms (GMOs); and
xi) Institute control and preventive measures for invasive alien species in
protected areas.
xii) Promote SLM best practices in Wildlife and Wetland Management; and
xiii) Establish and strengthen Financial mechanisms for combating DLDD.
4.2.14 Transport
a) Policy Framework
National Transport Policy (2003): The Policy has five main objectives and goals
namely: the need for a coherent policy, institutional arrangements, laws and regulation,
sector capacity building and technological development. In addition, it emphasizes
on incorporation of environment protection and management measures at the design
and development stages of transport infrastructure and when providing service;
strengthening of institutional framework and legislation for the provision of effective,
reliable and integrated transport service; and enhancing technical and managerial
capacity building in the transport sector. It further states that the low science and
technology base is one of the main challenges in technological development.
b) NAP Mainstreaming Guidelines
i) Identify the modes of transport and the most economic corridors to be
used for development planning;
ii) Define and integrate into the priority strategic rural road network that allow
linkages between agricultural and market centres of the country;
iii) Develop railway corridors to link strategic economic areas (e.g. agriculture
and mining);
iv) Establish an efficient urban public transportation system in major cities
and towns to reduce congestion, pollution, costs, and increase mobility
for both the urban and rural population;
v) Develop and create intermediate means of transportation, especially in the
rural areas;
vi) Establish a permanent inspection and maintenance programme for vehicles
and other equipment related to the transport sector;
35

--- Page 46 ---
vii) Establish regulations and tariffs against pollution emissions from vehicles;
viii) Establish mitigation measures focused on the reduction of environmental
impact of transport development projects;
ix) Promote diversification of the modes of transport, and improvement of the
quality of the transport services on the transit corridors.
x) Promote SLM best practices in transport; and
xi) Establish and strengthen Financial mechanisms for combating DLDD
4.2.15 Health
a) Policy Framework
National Health Policy (2007): The objective of the Policy towards environmental
health is to protect community health by enhancing sustainable environmental
health. To achieve this objective, some of the policy statements are to:-
i) Ensure that the community adhere to environmental health standards;
ii) Improve waste management systems including disposal of hospital
wastes;
iii) Continue to educate health service providers on the importance of
environmental health in their working areas;
iv) Review and enact laws and procedures for conservation and protection of
the environment; and
v) Continue to involve stakeholders in protecting natural resources.
b) NAP Mainstreaming Guidelines
i) Promote preventive and regenerative healthcare which lower the need for
subsequent resource-intensive interventions;
ii) Improve access and services in the general health care delivery system;
iii) Promote technologies in support of sanitation, environmental and
occupational health;
iv) Strengthen application of high impact interventions on the control of
diseases which are the main contributors to the burden of morbidity and
mortality, and the loss of productivity in the country;
36

--- Page 47 ---
v) Strengthen epidemiological surveillance system to ensure effective
detection of potential epidemics;
vi) Promote integration of indigenous herbal and traditional knowledge and
practices into the healthcare sector;
vii) Promote research into plant medicine to complement allopathic medicine
and commercialization of the research results;
viii) Establish specialized health centers to promote health tourism; and
ix) Create community awareness on issues related to environmental health by
establishing health related programmes such as food hygienic, separation
of wastes and pollution control at households;
x) Promote best practices in Health sector; and
xi) Establish and strengthen Financial mechanisms for combating DLDD
4.3 Sectoral Mainstreaming Action Plan
Each MDAs and LGAs should develop detailed action plan as shown below
Issue Priority Targets Expected Indicator Time Unit Key Funding
actions output frame Cost Actors Sources
(Tshs.)
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
4.4 Monitoring and Evaluation
Provide combating desertification performance indicators for monitoring and
evaluation (M&E) purposes. To facilitate M&E each actor should prepare Monitoring
Plans, Evaluation Plans, Reporting Plan and establish Planning review methodologies.
37

--- Page 48 ---
CHAPTER FIVE
OPERATIONALIZATION OF THE GUIDELINES
5.1 Introduction
This chapter aims at making the guideline operational. It articulates some of the
generic activities that need to be undertaken in operationalizing the guidelines. It
also describes key actors and their roles in facilitating the operationalization of the
guidelines. Some of the key issues that are prioritized for making the guidelines
operational include coordination and dissemination, finance mobilization, integration
NAP into policies, plans and programmes, monitoring, evaluation and reporting of
the guidelines.
5.2 Standard for operationalization
The overall coordination and dissemination of the guidelines is the responsibility
of the Vice President’s Office (VPO). The guidelines will be disseminated to
stakeholders such as MDAs, LGAs and Non State Actors through workshops, National
commemoration days, VPO website and booklets. The existing National Sustainable
Land Management Steering Committee; the National Sustainable Land Management
Technical Committee and the Environmental Working Group (EWG) are responsible
for overseeing and playing an advisory role in operationalizing the guidelines.
The financing of the guidelines is done through General Budget Support (GBS).
The mainstreaming interventions are integrated in each MDAs and LGAs through
respective Medium Term Expenditure Frameworks (MTEF) for implementation.
More resources are expected to be mobilized from international and regional funds,
funds under the UNCCD and Global Mechanism (GM), bilateral, individuals and
foundations funds.
The integration of the NAP into respective sectoral policies, plans and programmes
is the responsibility of the relevant MDAs. Specifically, the MDAs will undertake
DLDD situation analysis, identify relevant maistreaming activities, prepare projects,
programmes, action plans and mobilize funds for integration of NAP. The Prime-
Minister’s Office-Regional Administration and Local Government (PMO-RALG)
will work closely with Local Government Authorities (LGAs) through their various
departments in collaboration with lined sectoral ministries to implement the NAP
interventions at local level.
38

--- Page 49 ---
The Civil Society Organisations are encouraged to cooperate with the Government in
implementing the guidelines through various projects or programmes. The private
sectors either individually or in collaboration with the Government in public-private
partnership (PPP) arrangement are encouraged to implement innovative projects or
programme to NAP mainstreaming.
The Development Partners (DPs) either bilaterally or through their multilateral
arrangements are invited to support the Government to operationalize these guidelines
by building capacity in term of technical and financial support.
The overall responsibility for monitoring, evaluating and reporting of the guidelines
is under VPO. The progress towards operationalizing of the guidelines will be tracked
and reported periodically. The MDAs and LGAs are responsible for monitoring,
evaluating and reporting to VPO on progress made in the integration of NAP in their
respective policies, plans and programmes annually.
39

--- Page 50 ---
ANNEX
DEFINITION OF TERMINOLOGIES AND CONCEPTS
Land Degradation This refers to a process in which the value of the biophysical environment
is affected by a combination of human-induced processes acting upon the
land or is the deterioration in the quality of land, its topsoil, vegetation,
and/or water resources, caused usually by excessive or inappropriate
exploitation.
Desertification This is the process by which fertile land becomes desert, typically as
a result of drought, deforestation, or inappropriate agriculture or is the
process of land degradation in arid, semi-arid and dry sub-humid areas
resulting from various factors, including climatic variations and human
activities.
Drought This refers to the naturally occurring phenomenon that exists when
precipitation has been significantly below normal recorded levels,
causing serious hydrological imbalances that adversely affect land
resource production systems or Is an extended period when a region
receives a deficiency in its water supply, whether atmospheric, surface or
ground water. A drought can last for months or years, or may be declared
after as few as 15 days. Generally, this occurs when a region receives
consistently below average precipitation. It can have a substantial
impact on the ecosystem and agriculture of the affected region. Although
droughts can persist for several years, even a short, intense drought can
cause significant damage and harm to the local economy. Prolonged
droughts have caused mass migrations and humanitarian crises.
Combating Desertification This includes activities which are part of the integrated development
of land in arid, semi-arid and dry sub-humid areas for sustainable
development and are aimed at: (i) prevention and/or reduction of
land degradation, (ii) rehabilitation of partly degraded land and (iii)
reclamation of desertified land.
Sustainable Land It is defined as “the adoption of land use systems that, through appropriate
Management (SLM) management practices, enable land users to maximize the economic
and social benefits from the land while maintaining or enhancing the
ecological support functions of the land resources”
Best practices for SLM These are those SLM practices that should increase production and
be profitable, be cost efficient with short payback (economic viability),
easy to learn, accepted, effectively adopted and taken up (socially and
culturally accepted), environmentally friendly (contributing to the
improvement of soils, water, and flora and fauna (biodiversity) and
represent all stakeholders including socially marginalized groups.
40

--- Page 51 ---
Climate Change This refers to a change of climate, which is attributed directly or indirectly
to human activities that alter the composition of the global atmosphere,
and which is additional to natural variability, and observed over
comparable periods of time.
Climate Climate encompasses the statistics of meteorological conditions, that is,
temperature, humidity, atmospheric pressure, wind, rainfall, atmospheric
particle count and other meteorological elements in a given region over
long periods of time (usually 30 years).
Ecosystem Services: Are the benefits provided by ecosystems that contribute to making
human life both possible and worth living. The important benefits for
human beings that arise from healthily functioning ecosystems, notably
production of oxygen, soil genesis, and water detoxification.
Livelihood This refers to the means for securing the necessities of life so that
individuals, households and communities can sustain a living over time,
using a combination of social, economic, cultural and environmental
resources.
Resilience This refers to the ability of a system to adapt to climate change, whether
by taking advantage of the opportunities, or by dealing with their
consequences.
Sustainable development This refers to development which meets the needs of current generations,
(Sustainability) without compromising the ability of the future generations to meet theirs.
Soil Erosion Soil erosion occurs when soil is removed through the action of wind
and water at a greater rate than it is formed. Soil erosion is caused by: -
overstocking and overgrazing; inappropriate farming techniques such as
deep ploughing land two or three times a year to produce annual crops;
lack of crop rotation; and planting crops down the contour instead of
along it.
Salinisation This is the accumulation of soluble salts of sodium, magnesium and
calcium in soil to the extent that soil fertility is severely reduced.
Salinity This is the degree to which water contains dissolved salts.
Soil Pollution It is defined as the presence of materials in the soil which are harmful to
the living beings when they cross their threshold concentration levels.
In this case the factors or substances which affect the soil are not static.
It can be positive or negative. In the negative soil pollution there occur
an overuse of soil and erosion. The erosion occurs by water and air. The
water erosion occurs by the high speed rivers which remove the top layer
of soil.
41

--- Page 52 ---
Soil Acidification This refers to the buildup of hydrogen cations, also called protons,
reducing the soil pH. This happens when a proton donor gets added
to the soil. The donor can be an acid, such as nitric acid and sulfuric
acid (these acids are common components of acid rain). It can also be
a compound such as Aluminum Sulphate, which reacts in the soil to
release protons. Acidification occurs when base cations such as calcium,
magnesium, potassium and sodium are leached from the soil.
Siltation This refers to the pollution of water by fine particulate terrestrial clastic
material, with a particle size dominated by silt or clay. It refers both to the
increased concentration of suspended sediments, and to the increased
accumulation (temporary or permanent) of fine sediments on bottoms
where they are undesirable. Siltation is most often caused by soil erosion.
Sustainable land This refers to a knowledge-based procedure that aims at integrating
management the management of land, water, biodiversity, and other environmental
resources to meet human needs while sustaining ecosystem services
and livelihoods.
UNCCD This is the sole legally binding international agreement linking
environment and development to sustainable land management. The
Convention addresses specifically the arid, semi-arid and dry sub-
humid areas, known as the drylands, where some of the most vulnerable
ecosystems and peoples can be found.
Vulnerability This refers to the degree of susceptibility to the negative effects of climate
change. It is a function of the type, magnitude and frequency of climate
events to which a system is exposed to (exposure) as well as sensitivity
and capacity for adaptation (adaptive capacity).
42