--- Page 2 ---
Arab Republic of Egypt
Ministry of Agriculture and Land Reclamation
Desert Research Center
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat
Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought,
2024 – 2030
Jun, 2024

--- Page 3 ---
Arab Republic of Egypt

--- Page 4 ---
List of Contents
Title Page
List of Contents
List of Tables
List of Figures
Acknowledgment 1
Executive Summery 2
ىذيفنتلا صخلملا 7
Preface 12
1- Introduction 16
1-1- Linkage of UNCCD to other global conventions, and national 17
efforts
1-2- Overview of Egypt’s NAP 2014-2024 and the main achievements 22
1-2-1 Thematic Programs 22
1-2-2 Programs for irrigated agriculture 22
1-2-3 Programs of rehabilitation, conservation and use of rangeland 23
1-2-4 Programs of rain-fed agriculture 24
1-2-5 Programs for sand dunes fixation 25
2- Rational for preparing Egypt’s NAP 2024-2030 26
3- Country profile 29
3-1 Location and topography 29
3-2 Climate 30
3-3 Soil resources 31
3-4 Water resources 32
3-5 Natural vegetation resources 34
3-6 Agriculture 35
3-6-1 Cultivated area 35
3-6-2 Crop composition and crop area 35
3-6-3 Production of agricultural land 36
3-6-4 Self-sufficiency of some agricultural commodities 38
3-6-5 Total value and net income of agricultural production 38

--- Page 5 ---
Title Page
3-7 Demography 39
3-8 Economics 40
3-9 Agro-ecological zones 41
3-9-1 Nile Valley and Delta 43
3-9-2 North Coastal Zone 43
3-9-3 Inland Sinai and Eastern Desert 43
3-9-4 Western Desert 44
3-10 Land cover classifications 44
3-11 Rangeland 44
4- Desertification, land degradation and drought (DLD) driving 47
forces, pressures, processes and impacts in the different Agro-
Ecological Zones
4-1 Land cover changes 47
4-2 Land degradation driving forces, pressures, processes and impacts 48
4-2-1 Population growth 50
4-2-2 Urban sprawl on agricultural land 52
4-2-3 Pollution 53
4-2-4 Waterlogging and salinization 55
4-2-5 Soil erosion 55
4-2-6 Sand dunes movement 58
4-2-7 Sand and Dust Storms (SDS) 59
4-2-8 Coastal erosion 61
4-2-9 Climate change and drought 62
4-2-10 Economic losses of land degradation 64
5- Land degradation hot spots 67
6- Responses and efforts to combat desertification and neutralize 68
land degradation
6-1 Land Degradation Neutrality (LDN) 68
6-2 National interventions to combat desertification, land degradation 70
and drought
6-2-1 Ministry of Agriculture and Land Reclamation 70
6-2-2 Ministry of Water Resources and Irrigation. 80

--- Page 6 ---
Title Page
6-2-3 Ministry of Environment 82
6-2-4 Ministry of Housing, Utilities and Urban Communities 88
7- Women's role in activities to combat desertification and 89
sustainable development
7-1 The current state of women in the agriculture sector 90
7-2 Contribution of women in the agriculture sector 91
7-3 Supportive policy practices 92
7-4 Gender responsive approach 92
7-5 Access to information and technology 92
7-6 Achievements of women empowerment, related to desertification 92
8- Policy and legislative to address desertification, land degradation 96
and drought
9- Challenges and constraints 97
9-1 Financial issues 97
9-2 Technical issues 97
9-3 Logistic issues 97
10- Ongoing and proposed projects 98
10-1 Ongoing projects 98
10-2 Proposed projects (2024-2030) 99
10-2-1 Proposed projects of strategic objective 1 99
10-2-2 Proposed projects of strategic objective 2 100
10-2-3 Proposed projects of strategic objective 3 100
10-2-4 Proposed projects of strategic objective 4 102
11- Outcomes of the Egypt’s NAP 103
12- Funding mechanisms for the implementation of Egypt’s NAP 107
13- Monitoring and evaluation of the Egypt’s NAP 108
14- References 109

--- Page 7 ---
List of Tables
Title Page
Table (3-1): Different soil associations, their areas and percentages in 32
Egypt
Table (3-2): The cultivated area in Egyptian regions 36
Table (3-3): The development of the cultivated area in the new and old lands 37
Table (3-4): Area and production of the most important agricultural crops 37
Table (3-5): Livestock numbers and their meat and dairy production 37
Table (3-6): Fish production from various fisheries 38
Table (3-7): Self-sufficiency percentage of come agriculture 38
commodities
Table (3-8) Agriculture production value and income 39
Table (3-9): The main classes and areas of land cover in Egypt, 2019 45
Table (3-10): Description of different land cover classes 46
Table (4-1): Land cover changes during the period from 2000 to 2019 48
Table (4-2): The general framework for the driving factors and pressures 49
causing land resources degradation
Table (4-3): Total population density (2005- 2023) 50
Table (4-4): Number and area of holdings according to area categories 51
Table (4-5): Development of the per capita of cultivated and cropped 52
area
Table (4-6): Encroachments on agricultural lands (2022) 53
Table (4-7): Distribution and areas of sand dunes in Egypt 58
Table (4-8): Annual cost of environmental degradation (mean Estimate) 65
Table (5-1): Hot spots of land degradation types in the Agro-Ecological 67
Zones
Table (6-1): Classification and areas of natural reserves (protected areas) 85
in Egypt
Table (6-2): Relative distribution of forests areas using treated sewage 87
water in 2019
Table (6-3): Distribution of the new communities 88
Table (10-1): List of ongoing projects 98
Table (10-2): List of proposed projects of strategic objective 1 99
Table (10-3): List of proposed projects of strategic objective 2 100
Table (10-4): List of proposed protects of strategic objective 3 100
Table (10-5): List of proposed projects of strategic objective 4 102

--- Page 8 ---
List of Figures
Title Page
Fig. (3-1): Location map of Egypt 30
Fig. (3-2): Geographical distribution of the different major soil 31
associations in Egypt
Fig. (3-3): Relative distribution of water resources in Egypt during 34
2017/2018
Fig. (3-4): Relative distribution of water use in Egypt during 2017/2018 34
Fig. (3-5): Population pyramid of Egypt in 2020 40
Fig. (3-6): GDP comparison by sectors 41
Fig. (3-7): Agro-ecological Zones of Egypt 42
Fig. (4-1): General driving factors, pressures, degradation status, impacts, 47
and responses
Fig. (4-2): Development of the number of encroachment cases on 53
agricultural lands
Fig. (4-3): Distribution of sand seas and dune fields in Egypt 59
Fig. (4-4): Sources of SDS in Western Desert 60
Fig. (4-5): Regional sources of SDS affecting Egypt 60
Fig. (4-6): SDS events of 2008-2012 (NASA, 2012 61
Fig. (4-7): Coast erosion risks on the northern coasts 62
Fig. (6-1): Development of the number of encroachment cases on 71
agricultural lands
Fig. (6-2): Development of the number of encroachment removals on 72
agricultural lands
Fig. (6-3): The New Delta Project along the El Dabaa axis 77
Fig. (6-4): Location of protected areas in Egypt 86

--- Page 9 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 1
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
President of the Desert Research Center as the focal point of UNCCD,
Egypt and the members of the Egyptian Scientific and Technology Committee of
the UNCCD would like to express their sincere thanks and deep appreciation to
His Excellency Mr. El-Sayed Al-Kosier, Minister of Agriculture and
Land Reclamation for his continuous and successive support, assistance and
providing facilities required for the preparation, proofing, reviewing and
completion of this manuscript.
Thanks and gratefulness are also extended to the representatives of the
Desert Research Center, Executive Authority for Land Improvement Projects,
Ministry of Agriculture and Land Reclamation; Egyptian Environmental Affairs
Agency, Ministry of Environment, National Authority for Remote Sensing and
Space Sciences, Ministry of Scientific Research, Ministry of Water Resources and
Irrigation, Authority of Construction and Development of Egyptian Village,
Ministry of Local Development, Ministry of Defense and its various sectors and
NGOs for their fruitful and constructive information, cooperation, assistance and
contribution.
Finally, we are fully indebted and thankful for the contributors and
editorial board who prepared the multi-authored text to be pervasive and relevant
to integrated disciplines with broadened scope of their contribution, support,
suggestions, inclusive information, criticism, and joint efforts, which culminate
the appearance of NAP ready to submission to UNCCD Secretory.

--- Page 10 ---
Desert Research Center
2
Executive Summary
Desertification, Land Degradation, Drought (DLDD) and climate change
as well as the irrational use of land, water and vegetal resources are issues of
national, regional and global dimension. They are caused by complex interactions
among physical, biological, demographic, socio-economic and cultural factors.
Such issues lead to reduce the cultivatable land, fodder and food production,
animal proteins and resilience to climate change, to increase malnutrition, and
poverty, not to mention food insecurity, forced migration, biodiversity loss, and
water scarcity. All these issues continue to pose serious challenges to the
sustainable development of the affected areas of Egypt. Egypt ratified the UN
Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD) in 1995.
The UNCCD 2018-2030 Strategy Framework recognized that addressing
DLDD will help improve the productivity of land and rehabilitation, conservation
and sustainable management of land and water resources. The strategy Framework
will contribute to
(1) Achieve the objectives of the convention and the 2030 agenda for SDGs, in
particular regarding sustainable development goal (SDG) 15 and target 15.3:
“by 2030, combat desertification, restore degraded land and soil, including
land affected by desertification, drought and floods, and strive to achieve a
land degradation- neutral world” and other interrelated SDGs, within the
scope of Convention.
(2) Improving the living conditions of affected populations.
(3) Enhancing ecosystem services.
The UNCCD 2018-2030 Strategy has five strategic objectives that are
reviewed as follows:
Strategic objective 1: To improve the conditions of affected ecosystems, combat
desertification/land degradation, promote sustainable land
management and contribute to land degradation neutrality.
Strategic objective 2: To improve the living conditions of affected populations.
Strategic objective 3: To mitigate, adapt to, and manage the effects of drought in
order to enhance resilience of vulnerable populations and
ecosystems.

--- Page 11 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 3
Strategic objective 4: To generate global benefits through effective implementation
of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification.
Strategic objective 5: To mobilize substantial and additional financial and
nonfinancial resources to support the implementation of the
convention by building effective partnerships at global and
national level.
The achievement of these Strategic Objectives will be guided by implementation
framework:
(a) Financial and non-Financial resources.
(b) Policy and planning.
(c) Action and measures on the ground.
The UNCCD 2018-2030 Strategy urges the “Parties” to develop their
National Action Plans (NAPs) with the implementation framework of the strategy.
The Government of Egypt, represented by the Ministry of Agriculture and Land
Reclamation, prepared and adopted the (NAP) to combat desertification, land
degradation and drought in 2005 and 2015. Following the adoption of UNCCD
2018-2030 strategy framework to enhance the implementation of the convention
(2017), the current report provides an update on the Egyptian National Action
Plan to combat desertification, land degradation and drought (2015-2023).
A participatory bottom-up approach was adopted through all phases of the
preparation process. Multiple stakeholders from governmental and community-
based organizations in the country participated in the meetings and workshops for
reviewing and developing the NAP 2024-2030.
The preparation of the NAP was based on key results of the situation analysis
of the country and the assessment of the NAP 2015-2023 against the operational
objectives of the UNCCD strategy. The situation analysis revealed that improper
management of water and soil resources, overgrazing and removal of natural
vegetation of natural rangelands, intensive agriculture, recurrent droughts, land
tenure, and non-sustainable land uses (such as improper plowing, inappropriate
rotations, deforestation, and random urbanization), wind /water erosion, Sand and
Dust Storms (SDS), water scarcity, economic problems and poverty are of the main
drivers of desertification and land degradation. The situation will be accentuated
further by the threats of climate change and increasing population growth which

--- Page 12 ---
Desert Research Center
4
will put more pressure on the natural resources.
Therefore, the new Egyptian National Action Plan (NAP) was developed
with a future vision to avoid, minimize and reverse desertification, land
degradation and mitigate the effects of drought in affected areas at national and
sub - national scale and strive to achieve a land degradation-neutral world
consistent with the 2030 agenda for sustainable development from 2024 to 2030
through sustainability of land resources, enhancement of population livelihood,
and contribution to the national economy, capacity building, the sharing of
successful experiences, technology transfer, the provision of scientific support,
raising awareness, mobilization of resources and the provision of assistance in
implementing policies at nation level.
The new Egyptian National Action Plan (NAP) also suggested the
following actions and measures adequate communication to mobilize key
stakeholders to support combating desertification; investment in research and
knowledge management; establishing the Coordination Unit of the 3-Rio
Conventions; fostering community-based approaches through participatory
methodologies and multi-stakeholder dialogue; adopting integrated ecosystem
approaches for conservation and sustainable use of natural ecosystems;
developing a national monitoring program to monitor the conditions of affected
populations and ecosystems; support poverty reduction; environmental
sustainability and orienting higher education curricula to deal with the DLDD and
SLM related issues at national universities to improve the graduates’ knowledge
of such issues.
The updated NAP to combat desertification, land degradation and drought
in Egypt 2024 - 2030 has been prepared to realize the expected outcomes under
each of the UNCCD 2018-2030 five strategic objectives as follow:
The expected outcomes of strategic objective 1 are:
1.1. Land productivity and related ecosystems services are maintained or
enhanced;
1.2. The vulnerability of affected ecosystem is reduced and the resilience of
ecosystem is increased.
1.3. The measures are identified and implemented, and necessary monitoring
systems are established.

--- Page 13 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 5
1.4. Measures for sustainable land management and the combating of
desertification / land degradation are shared, promoted and implemented.
The expected outcomes of strategic objective 2 are:
2.1. Food security and adequate access to water for people in affected areas
is improved.
2.2. The livelihoods of people in affected areas are improved and diversified.
2.3. Local people, especially women and youth, are empowered and
participate in decision-making processes in combating DLDD.
2.4. Migration forced by desertification and land degradation is substantially
reduced.
The expected outcomes of strategic objective 3 are:
3.1. Ecosystems’ vulnerability to drought is reduced, including through
sustainable land and water management practices.
3.2. Communities’ resilience to drought is increased.
The expected outcomes of strategic objective 4 are:
4.1. Sustainable land management and the combating of desertification /land
degradation contribute to the conservation and sustainable use of
biodiversity and addressing climate change.
4.2. Synergies with other multilateral environmental agreements and
processes are enhanced.
The expected outcomes of strategic objective 5 are:
5.1. Governmental support is provided for implementing effective and
targeted capacity-building and “on-the- ground interventions” in the
affected areas.
5.2. Adequate and timely public and private financial resources are further
mobilized and made available to hotspots in Egypt.
5.3. Extensive efforts are implemented to promote technology transfer.
The updated NAP to combat desertification, land degradation and drought in
Egypt 2024 - 2030 includes the action plan of many projects to achieve the
UNCCD 2018-2030 five strategic objectives in terms of monitoring programs on
DLDD and SLM, and an integrated financial plan.

--- Page 14 ---
Desert Research Center
6
The action plan has been prepared and outlining the responsible parties for
addressing DLDD issues, DLDD platform for knowledge sharing, a national
monitoring program on DLDD and SLM, and updating and fulfilling capacity
needs for proper implementation of DLDD activities.

--- Page 15 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 7
ىذيفنتلا صخللما
دراوملاو هايملاو يضرا لأل ديشرلا ريغ مادختسلإا بناجب خانملا ريغتو فافجلاو يضرا لأا روهدتو رحصتلا نإ
لماوعلا نيب ةدقعم تلاعافت نع ةمجان اياضقلا هذه .ىملاعو ىميلقإو ىنطو دعب تاذ اياضق نولكشي ةيتابنلا
صقن ىلإ تايدحتلا هذه لثم يدؤتو .ةيفاقثلاو ةيداصتقلااو ةيعامتجلإاو ةيفرا جوميدلاو ةيجولويبلاو ةيئايزيفلا
ةردقلاو فايللااو ةيناويحلا تانيتوربلاو فلاعلأاو ءاذغلا جاتناو ةعرازلل ةحلاصلا يضرا لأا ةحاسم نم لك
ةرجهلاو يئاذغلا نملأا ةلق نع ًلاضف رقفلاو ةيذغتلا ءوس ةدايزو ،خانملا ريغت ةهجاوم يف دومصلا ىلع
مامأ ةريطخ تايدحتو تاقوعم لكشت اياضقلا هذه لك لزا ت لاو .هايملا ةردنو يجولويبلا عونتلا نادقفو ةيرسقلا
مملأا ةيقافتا ىلع ةيبرعلا رصم ةيروهمج تعقو دقو .رصم يف ةررضتملا قطانملا يف ةمادتسملا ةيمنتلا
. 1995 ماع رحصتلا ةحفاكمل ةدحتملا
ةحفاكم تايلمع نأب 2030- 2018 رحصتلا ةحفاكمل ةدحتملا مملأا ةيقافتلا يجيترا تسلإا راطلإا رقأ
اهروهدت ةلاح ىف اهليهأت ةداعإو يضرا لأا ةيجاتنإ نيسحت ىلع دعاستس فافجلاو يضرا لأا روهدتو رحصتلا
مهاسيس راطلإا اذه نأو .هايملاو يضرا لأا ىدرو مل ةمادتسملا ةرادلإا قيقحت بناجب اهيلع ظافحلاو ًايبسن
:يف
ةمادتسملا ةيمنتلا ةطخ فادهأ قيقحت اذكو رحصتلا ةحفاكمل ةدحتملا مملأا ةيقافتإ فادهأ قيقحت )1(
15.3 ةياغلاو 15 مقر ةمادتسملا ةيمنتلا فدهب قلعتي اميف اميس لاو ،2030 ماعل ةدحتملا مملأل
،ةروهدتملا ةبرتلاو يضرا لأا ةداعتسإو ،رحصتلا ةحفاكم ىلإ فدهت ىتلاو 2030 ماع لولحب كلذو
نم لاخ ملاع قيقحتل يعسلاو ،تاناضيفلاو فافجلاو رحصتلا نم ةررضتملا يضرا لأا كلذ يف امب
قاطن يف ةلصلا تاذ ةمادتسملا ةيمنتلا فادهأ نم اهريغ قيقحت نع لاضف يضرا لأا روهدت ةرهاظ
.ةيقافتلإا
.نيررضتملا ناكسلل ةيشيعملا فورظلا نيسحت )2(
. يئيبلا ماظنلا تامدخ زيزعت )3(
فادهأ ةسمخ نمضتت 2030- 2018 رحصتلا ةحفاكمل ةدحتملا مملأا ةيقافتلإ يجيترا تسلاا راطلإا نأ امك
: يلاتلا وحنلا ىلع اهضرا عتسا نكمي ةيجيترا تسا
، ىضرا لأا روهدت / رحصتلا ةحفاكمو ، ةرثأتملا ةيجولوكيلإا مظنلا ةلاح نيسحت :1 ىجيتراتسلاا فدهلا
. ىضرا لأا روهدت دييحت ىف ماهسلإاو ، ىضرا لأل ةمادتسملا ةرادلإا زيزعتو
. نيرثأتملا ناكسلا ةشيعم فورظ نيسحت :2 ىجيتراتسلأا فدهلا
نيرثأتملا ناكسلا ةردق نيسحت لجأ نم اهترا ادإو اهعم فيكتلاو فافجلا راثا فيفخت :3 ىجيتراتسلاا فدهلا
.ملقأتلا ىلع ةيجولوكيلإا مظنلاو

--- Page 16 ---
Desert Research Center
8
رحصتلا ةحفاكم ةيقافتإ ذيفنت قيرط نع ىملاعلا ديعصلا ىلع ةيئيب عفانم بلج :4 ىجيتراتسلاا فدهلا
. ةيلعافب
ءانب للاخ نم ةيقافتلإا ذيفنت معدل ةيفاضإو ةريبك ةيلام ريغو ةيلام دراوم ةئبعت :5 ىجيتراتسلاا فدهلا
. ينطولاو يملاعلا نييوتسملا ىلع ةلاعف تاكرا ش
وحنلا ىلع حضوملا ذيفنتلا راطإب ةيجيترا تسلإا فادهلأا هذه قيقحت يف داشرتسلإا متيس هنأ نع ً لاضف
:ىلاتلا
.ةيلاملا ريغو ةيلاملا دراوملا ريفوت )أ(
.لاعفلا طيطختلاو ةميلسلا تاسايسلا عابتإ )ب(
.عقاولا ضرأ ىلع ريبادتلاو لمعلا ططخ ذيفنت )ج(
لودلا " ) 2030- 2018 ( ةريخلأا اهتيجيترا تسإ ةصاخو رحصتلا ةحفاكمل ةدحتملا مملأا ةيقافتإ تثح
ىذيفنتلا راطلاا رابتعلإ ا ىف ذخلأا عم )NAP( ةينطولا لمعلا ط طخو تايجيترا تسلإا ريوطت ىلع "فرا طلأا
.ةيجيترا تسلإل بحاصملا
روهدتو رحصتلا ةحفاكمل ةينطولا لمعلا ةطخ ةيرصملا ةموكحلا تدمتعإو تدعأ نيريخلاا نيدقعلا للاخو
دامتعإ د عبو .يضرا لأا حلاصتساو ةعرازلا ةرزاو للاخ نم ، 2015و 2005 يماع فافجلاو يضرا لأا
نم 2017 ماع ىف رداصلا فافجلاو ى ضرا لأا روهدتو رحصتلا ةحفاكمل ىلبقتسملا يجيترا تسلإا راطلإا
نإف ، ةيقافتلاا فادهأ ذيفنت زيزعتل كلذو 2030-2018 نم ةرتفلل رحصتلا ةحفاكمل ةدحتملا مملأا ةيقافتإ
ةينطولا لمعلا ةطخل ًاثيدحت مدقت )2030 – 2024( ةيلاحلا ةيرصملا ةينطولا لمعلا ةطخو ةيجيترا تسإ
ىف اهذيفنت متو 2015 ىف تردص ىتلاو فافجلاو يضرا لأا روهدتو رحصتلا ةحفاكمل ةقباسلا ةيرصملا
ىنطو لا لمعلا ءاكر شو ةينعملا تائيهلاو ترازاولا نم ديدعلا ةطساوب 2023 ةياهن ىتحو 2015 نم ةرتفلا
.ةيلودو ةيلحم ةيعيبطو ةيئيبو ةيداصتقإو ةيعامتجإ ترا يغتم ةدع عم قفاوتت ىتح
.ةثيدحلا ةينطولا لمعلا ةطخل دادعلإا لحرا م عيمج للاخ يدعاصتلا يكراشتلا جهنلا رابتعلإ ا ىف ذخلأا متو
يف ةلودلا يف ةيعمتجملاو ةصاخلاو ةيموكحلا تائيهلا نم ةحلصملا باحصأ نم ديدعلا كراش دقو
. 2030-2024 ةرتفلا ىف اهذ يف نتل ةينطولا لمعلا ةطخ ثيدحتو ةعجرا مل لمعلا شروو تاعامتجلإا
ةطخ مييقتو رصم يف عضولا ليلحتل ةيسيئرلا جئاتنلا ىلإ ةينطولا لمعلا ةطخ ثيدحتو دادعإ دنتسإ دقو
- 2015 ( ةقباسلا ةرتفلا نع فافجلا رثأ فيفختو ىضرا لأا روهدتو رحصتلا ةحفاكمل ةينطولا لمعلا
رئاجلا يعرلاو ، هايملاو ةبرتلا دراومل ةميلسلا ريغ ةرادلإا نأ قباسلا عضولا ليلحت حضوأ ثيح .)2023
تلااحو ،ةفثكملا تاعرازلاو ،رصمل ىبرغلا ىلامشلا لحاسلا ىف ةصاخو ةيعيبطلا يعرا ملا نم تاتابنلا ةلزا إو
لثم( يضرا لأل ةمادتسملا ريغ تامادختسلإاو ،ةريخ لأا دوقعلا ىف يضرا لأا ةزايح تيتفتو ،ةرركتملا فافجلا
ىعرازلا طاشنلا ليوحتو ،ريجشتلا تايلمع ةلقو ،ةبسانملا ةيعرا زلا ةرودلا عابتإ مدعو ،ميلسلا ريغ ثرحلا
فصاوعلا طاشنو ،هايملا/حايرلاب ةبرتلا فرا جناو ، )ةيعرازلا ىضرا لأا ىف ىرخلأا ةطشنلأا نم هريغ ىلإ

--- Page 17 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 9
عفاودلا مهأ نمض لماوعلا هذه ربتعت ثيح ، رقفلاو ةيداصتقلإا لكاشملاو ،هايملا ةردنو ،ةيبرا تلاو ةيلمرلا
ةدايزو خانملا ريغت تاديدهت ببسب ربكأ لكشب عضولا مقافتي فوسو .يضرا لأا روهدتو رحصتلل ةيسيئرلا
. ةيعيبطلا دراوملا ىلع طغضلا نم ديزيس يذلا يناكسلا ومنلا
تنمضت ىتلا ةيجيترا تسلإا ت اوجفلا نم ديدعلا نع 2015 ىف ةرداصلا ةينطولا لمعلا ةطخ مييقت فشك امك
دصرل قيقد ينطو جمان رب ىلإ راقتفلإاو ،فافجلاو يضرا لأا روهدتو رحصتلا اياضقب يعولا ىلإ راقتفلإا
ناكسلا فورظ ةعباتمو ،رً ارضت رثكلأا قطانملا ديدحتو ةيجولوكيلإا مظنلا ةلاحل تاهاجتلإ او ترا يغتلا
ةلقو .فافجلاو يضرا لأا روهدتو رحصتلا اياضق ميمعت ضافخنإو ،روهدتلاو رحصتلا تايلمعب نيرثأتملا
ةدحتملا مملأل ثلاثلا ةيئيبلا وير تايقافتإ نيب مغانتلاو قيسنتلا ىلإ راقتفلإاو ،ةيمنتلا ططخ ىف اهنيمضت
ةيلاملا دراوملا ةئبعتل ةمظنم تايلآ ىلإ راقتفلإاو ،)خانملا ريغت ، ىجولويبلا عو نتلا ، رحصتلا ةحفاكم(
. ةيمملأا ةيئيبلا تايقافتلإا هذه ذيفنتل ةيلودلاو ةيلحملا رداصملا نم ةمزلالا
فلتخم ةكراشم ضافخنإ ىلع يليغشت روظنم نم ةقباسلا ةينطولا لمعلا ططخ تاوجف تلمتشأ امك
ةفاضلإاب ،فافجلاو يضرا لأا روهدتو رحصتلا اياضقب ةلصلا تاذ ةينطولا ناجللا يف ةحلصملا باحصأ
ةفرعملا ةرادإب ةينعملا قيسنتلا ةهجل مدقملا ليومتلاو معدلا ةلقو ،نيسنجلا نم ةكراشملا ىف ةاواسملا ةلق ىلإ
وه و فافجلاو يضرا لأا روهدتو رحصتلا اياضقب ةلصلا تاذ نييسيئرلا ةحلصملا باحصأ عم اهلدابتو
رحصتلا اياضق نأشب هيجوتلا روصقو ،ةيلحملا ةيديلقتلا فراعملا مادختسإ ةصاخو ،ءرا حصلا ثوحب زكرم
نكمي تاجرخم ىلإ ثوحبلا جئاتن ةمجرت مدعو ،ةيثحبلاو ةيميلعتلا جمرا بلا يف فافجلاو يضرا لأا روهدتو
ةيجولونكتلاو ةيثحبلا تاسسؤملا نيب لصاوتلا صقنو ،يضرا لأل ةمادتسملا ةرادلإا تاسرامم ىف اهمادختسإ
.فافجلاو يضرا لأا روهدتو رحصتلا اياضقب ةلصلا تاذ ةينطولا
يضرا لأا روهدتو رحصتلا بنجتل ةيلبقتسم ةيؤرب )NAP( ةيلاحلا ةينطولا لمعلا ةطخ ثيدحت مت هيلعو
ةررضتملاو ةرثأتملا قطانملا يف فافجلا راثآ نم فيفختلاو امههاجتإ سكعو ىندلأا دحلا ىلإ امهليلقتو
ةدحتملا مملأا ةيقافتلإ ىجيترا تسلإا راطلإا عم قفاوتتو ، روهدتلا ةرهاظ نم ةيلاخ ىضرا أ ىلع لوصحلاو
ةيمنتلا ةطخو ،2030 ماعل ةمادتسملا ةيمنتلل ةدحتملا مملأا ةطخو )2030 – 2018 ( رحصتلا ةحفاكمل
قيرط نع 2030 ىلإ 2024 ماع نم ةرتفلا ىف كلذو ، 2019 ىف ةرداصلاو ةثدحملا ةمادتسملا ةيعرزلا
دراوملا ةئبعتو يعولا ةدايزو يملعلا معدلا ريفوتو ايجولونكتلا لقنو ةحجانلا براجتلا لدابتو ترا دقلا ءانب
. ىنطولا تحتو ينطولا ىوتسملا ىلع تاسايسلا ذيفنت يف ةدعاسملا ميدقتو ةيلاملا
:لثم ًاقباس اهيلا راشملا تاوجفلا دسل ةمزلالا ريبادتلاو تاءرا جلإا ةيلاحلا ةينطولا لمعلا ةطخ تحرتقإ امك
؛فافجلاو ىضرا لأا روهدتو رحصتلا ةحفاكم معدل نيي سيئرلا ةحلصملا باحصأ دشحل لاعفلا لصاوتلا
ثلاثلا ةيئيبلا وير تايقافتا نيب قيسنتلاب صتخت ةيموق ةئيه ءاشنإو ؛ةفرعملا ةرادإو ثوحبلا يف رامثتسلإاو
؛نيددعتملا ةحلصملا باحصأ نيب راوحلاو ةيكراشتلا تايجهنملا للاخ نم يعمتجملا جهنلا زيزعتو ؛
عضوو ؛مادتسملا اهمادختسإو ةيعيبطلا ةيجولوكيلإا مظنلا ظفحل ةلماكتم لمع جمرا بو تايجهنم دامتعإو
ُ

--- Page 18 ---
Desert Research Center
10
ةيئيبلا ةمادتسلااو ؛رقفلا نم دحلا معدو ؛ةررضتملا ةيئيبلا مظنلاو ناكسلا فورظ دصرل ينطو جمانرب
ةمادتسملا ةرادلإاو فافجلاو يضرا لأا روهدتو رحصتلا اياضق عم لماعتلل يلاعلا ميلعتلا جهانم هيجوتو
. اياضقلا هذهب نيجيرخلا ةفرعم نيسحتل ةينطولا تاعماجلا يف يضرا لأل
ر صم يف فافجلاو يضرا لأا روهدتو رحصتلا ةحفاكمل ةيلاحلا ةثدحملا ةينطولا لمعلا ةطخ دادعإ مت امك
ةسمخلا ةيجيترا تسلاا فادهلأا نم فده لك راطإ يف ةعقوتملا تاجرخملا قيقحتل )2030-2024 ( ةرتفلا
: يلاتلا وحنلا ىلع ) 2030- 2018 ( رحصتلا ةحفاكمل ةدحتملا مملأا ةيقافتلإ
-1
: 1 يجيتراتسلاا فدهلل ةعقوتملا تاجرخملا
. اهتدايز وأ ةلصلا تاذ ةيجولوكيلإ ا مظنلا تامدخو ىضرا لأا ةيجاتنإ ىلع ظافحلا :1- 1
.ملقأتلا ىلع ةيجولوكيلإ ا مظنلا ةردق ةدايزو ةرثأتملا ةيجولوكيلإا مظنلا ةشاشه نم دحلا :2- 1
.ةمزلالا دصرلا مظن ثادحتسإو ، اهذيفنتو ةلصلا تاذ ريبادتلا ديدحت :3- 1
/ رحصتلا ةحفاكمو ىضرا لأل ةمادتسملا ةرادلاا ققحت ىتلا ةفداهلا ريبادتلا ذيفنت ىف ةكراشملا :4- 1
. اهذيفنتو ريبادتلا هذه زيزعتو ،ىضرا لأا روهدتو
-2
: 2 يجيتراتسلاا فدهلل ةعقوتملا تاجرخملا
مهلو صحل ةمئلاملا لبسلا ريسيتو ةرثأتملا قطانملا ىف نوشيعي نمل ىئاذغلا نملأا نيسحت :1- 2
. هايملا ىلع
.اهعيونتو ةرثأتملا قطانملا ناكس شيع لبس نيسحت :2- 2
يف ررا قلا عنص تايلمع ىف مهتكراشم نم ، بابشلاو ءاسنلا اميس لا ، نييلحملا ناكسلا نيكمت :3- 2
. فافجلاو ىضرا لأا روهدتو رحصتلا ةحفاكم لاجم
. ىضرا لاا روهدتو رحصتلا نع ةمجانلا ةيرسقلا ةرجهلا نم ريبك لكشب دحلا :4- 2
-3
: 3 يجيتراتسلاا فدهلل ةعقوتملا تاجرخملا
يضرا لأل ةمادتسملا ةرادلإا تاسرامم للاخ نم ،فافجلل ةيجولوكيلإ ا مظنلا ضرعت رثأ نم دحلا :1- 3
.هايملاو
فافجلا عم ملقأتلا ىلع ةرثأتملا تاعمتجملا ةردق ةدايز :2- 3
-4
: 4 يجيتراتسلاا فدهلل ةعقوتملا تاجرخملا
يجولويبلا عونتلا ظفح يف يضرا لأا روهدت /رحصتلا ةحفاكمو يضرا لأل ةمادتسملا ةرادلإا ماهسإ :1- 4
. خانملا ريغت ةجلاعمو مادتسملا همادختساو
. ىرخلأا فرا طلأا ةددعتملا ةيئيبلا تايلمعلاو تاقافتلاا عم رزآتلا هجوأ زيزعت :2- 4
-5
: 5 يجيتراتسلاا فدهلل ةعقوتملا تاجرخملا
يف "ةيناديملا تلاخدتلا"و ةفدهتسملاو ةلاعفلا ترا دقلا ءانب تايلمع ذيفنتل يموكحلا معدلا ريفوت 1- 5
. ةررضتملا قطانملا

--- Page 19 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 11
قطانملل اهتحاتإو بسانملا تقولا يفو ةيفاكلا ةصاخلاو ةماعلا ةيلاملا دراوملا نم ديزملا ةئبعت 2- 5
. رصم يف ةررضتملا
. ىضرا لاا روهدتو رحصتلا ةحفاكم ىف ايجولونكتلا لقن زيزعتل قاطنلا ةعساو دوهج لذب 3- 5
ةرتفلل رصم يف فافجلاو يضرا لأا روهدتو رحصتلا ةحفاكمل ةثدحملا ةينطولا لمعلا ةطخ تنمضت امك
ةيقافتلإ ةسمخلا ةيجيترا تسلاا فادهلأا قيقحت ىف ةصصختملا تاعورشملا نم ديدعلا )2030- 2024(
رحصتلا دصرب قلعتي ام تاعورشملا هذه مهأ نمو )2030- 2018( رحصتلا ةحفاكمل ةدحتملا مملأا
ةكراشمب ةثيدحلا ةينطولا لمعلا ةطخ دادعإ مت دقو .يضرا لأل ةمادتسملا ةرادلإاو فافجلاو يضرا لأا روهدتو
يضرا لأا روهدتو رحصتلا اياضق ةجلاعم نع ةلوؤسملا ةيعمتجملاو ةصاخلاو ةيموكحلا تاهجلاو تائيهلا
ثوحب زكرم( فافجلاو يضرا لأا روهدتو رحصتلا نأشب ةفرعملا لدابتو قيسنتلا ةهج ةياعرب ،فافجلاو
نم ترا دقلا ءانبو ثيدحت نع تاعورشم تنمضت امك ،)ىضرا لأا حلاصتساو ةعرازلا ةرزاو - ءرا حصلا
لبس نيس حتو هرثأ فيفختو فافجلا عم ملقأتلاو يضرا لأا روهدتو رحصتلا ةطشنلأ ميلسلا ذيفنتلا لجأ
قطانملا ةماد تسإ ىلع لمعلاو فافجلا وأ ىضرا لأا روهدتو رحصتلا ةرهاظب نيرثأتملا ناكسلل ةشيعملا
.ةيعيبطلا ىعرا ملا ةيمنتو ةيمحملا

--- Page 20 ---
Desert Research Center
12
Preface
Preparing an update to the Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) is a major
national commitment towards the United Nations Convention to Combat
Desertification (UNCCD). This preparation is carried out by Desert Research
Center (DRC), as the National Focal Point for UNCCD. Egypt was the fourth
country to adopt this convention in 1995 out of more than 190 countries so far.
The importance of preparing the NAP stems from several considerations, the most
important of which at the national level is activating national efforts to combat
land degradation (desertification) to reduce major losses in the productivity of
available natural resources, in addition to reducing harmful effects on the
environmental, economic and social levels. At the regional level, preparing this
plan will encourage participation in sub-regional and regional efforts and develop
the potential for cooperation with Arab and African Countries in various fields.
At the international level, the plan has great positive effects, the most important
of which is the development of cooperation with international donor bodies
concerned with supporting efforts to combat land degradation at various national,
regional and international levels.
Efforts to prepare and update the current plan were initiated via directions
from Prof. Dr. Abdullah Zaghloul, Former President of the DRC to hold intensive
meetings more than six months ago, which included inviting the relevant
institutions at the national level to actively participate in providing data, activities,
and efforts related to combat desertification, either the implemented projects or
those underway in light of the NAP (2015/2023). The response of these concerned
institutions of the members of the Science and Technology Committee was active
and effective. The committee's work activities included analyzing the previous
situation, efforts and projects to combat desertification, land degradation and
drought at different levels.
On 15/10/2023, it was approved to form a working team of scientists and
experts from the DRC staff stem from the Science and Technology Committee
under the supervision of Prof. Dr. Hossam Ahmed Shawky - the current
president of the DRC and led by Prof. Dr. Abdullah Zaghloul - coordinator for
the working team to prepare an update to the Egypt’s NAP in accordance with the
terms of reference for preparing the NAP approved by the UNCCD and includes
the various efforts and the main results of analyzing the previous situation through

--- Page 21 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 13
evaluating the NAP to combat desertification, land degradation and mitigate the
impact of drought for the previous period (2015-2023) and identifying the
challenges and constrains that hindered the implementation of some projects from
the previous plan.
The working team was formed as follows:
Prof. Dr. / Abdullah Kassem Zaghloul President of the DRC (2020-2023)
Prof. Dr. / Naiim Moselhy Mohamed President of the DRC (2015-2020)
Prof. Dr. / Ahmed Mohamed Yousef President of the DRC (2015)
Prof. Dr. / Mohamed Yahia Draz President of the DRC (2009-2011)
Prof. Dr. / Mostafa Sabry El Hakeem Emeritus Prof. of Rangelands
Management DRC
Prof. Dr. / Rafat Fahmi Mesak Emeritus Prof. of Geology - DRC
Prof. Dr. / Mohamed Mohamed Wassif Emeritus Prof. of Soil Conservation
DRC
Prof. Dr. / Taher Mostafa Yossif Prof. of Soil Sciences - DRC
The members of the working team should be attributed to the valuable assistance,
encouragement and unlimited support from prof. Dr. Hosam Ahmed Shawky the
current president of the DRC for completing this Egypt’s National Action Plan
(NAP 2024 – 2030).
The working team carried out the tasks assigned via several weekly
meetings and ended with the preparation of the complete main draft of the NAP
to be sent to the authorities, institutions and national experts for their opinions and
comments by the end of February, 2024. Then, an update of the plan in its final
form is prepared to be submitted the higher national committee to combat
desertification to take the necessary recommendations and approve it and to send
to Executive Secretariat of UNCCD.

--- Page 22 ---
Desert Research Center
14
Sovenir photo for the committee members for preparing the Egypt’s National
action plan (NAP) to combat Desertification, land degradation and Drought. 2024
– 2030 with Prof. Dr. Hosam Ahmed Shawky, President of the DRC and focal
point of the UNCCD Convention.
Members from right to left.
Prof. Dr. Ahmed Mohamed Yousef
Prof. Dr. Mostafa Sabry El Hakeem
Prof. Dr. Mohamed Mohamed Wassif
Prof. Dr. Mohamed Yahia Draz
Prof. Dr. Abdulla Kassem Zaghloul (Chair of the Committee)
Prof. Dr. Hosam Ahmed Shawky (President of the DRC & Focal Point)
Prof. Dr. Naiim Moselhy Mohamed
Prof. Dr. Taher Mostafa Yossif
Prof. Dr. Rafat Fahmi Mesak

--- Page 23 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 15

--- Page 24 ---
Desert Research Center
16
1- Introduction
The National Action Plan (NAP) to combat desertification is a national
sectorial document aiming at identifying the factors contributing to desertification
and practical measures necessary to combat desertification and mitigate the
effects of drought under the guidelines of UNCCD. It proposed a strategy
including priority programs, their implementation and coordination requires
creation of a competent international setup.
In view of the country interest in sustainable development within a
framework of reserving the environment and combat land degradation, the
National Action Plan (NAP) to combat desertification was prepared including the
followings: (1) driving forces, processes and impact of desertification and
drought; (2) land degradation hot spots; (3) responses and efforts to combat
desertification and drought; and (4) proposed programs and projects to combat
desertification and drought.
The United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD)
entered into force on December 26, 1996. Egypt became a signatory in October
1994, ratifying the Convention in 1995. The Convention affirms the critical role
of countries in reversing and preventing desertification and mitigating the effects
of drought.
Historically, Egypt is a pioneer for Sustainable Land Managemt (SLM),
food security and drought resilience, where, SLM was implemented on the
ground in Egypt from thousands of years ago. Where the Prophet Yusuf gathered
up all the food of the wet seven years when there was plenty in the land of Egypt,
and stored up food particularly, the wheat grains with spikes in all the cities in
large amounts. When the drought and the famine had spread over all the land, the
Prophet Yusuf opened all the storehouses. In addition, Egypt has historical and
recent experience in drought resilience through watershed management, plant
diversification, water development and management and rainwater harvesting and
recharging shallow groundwater aquifers (since Romans Era thousands of years
age). In addition, Egypt has broad experience in reducing the risks of Sand and
Dust Storms (SDS) in the Western Desert, Sinai and parts of the Nile Vally and
Delta ( since 1929).
Desert Research Center (DRC) is the Focal Point of UNCCD under the
umbrella of Ministry of Agriculture and Land Reclamation (MALR) in Egypt.

--- Page 25 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 17
The Egyptian Partners / Stakeholders with MALR are: Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, Ministry of Environment (Egyptian Environmental Affairs Agency);
Ministry of Water Resources and Irrigation; Ministry of Health & Population;
Ministry of Housing, Utilities & Urban Communities; Ministry of Planning &
Ministry of International Cooperation; Academy of Scientific Research and
Technology (ASRT); Egyptian Council of Legislations (Parliament); Egyptian
Meteorological Authority; Egyptian Cabinet Information & Decision Support
Center; Climate Change Information Center; Renewable Energy and Expert
Systems Center; National Authority for Remote Sensing and Space Science;
Agricultural Research Center; General Organization for Physical Planning;
academic institutions and universities …..etc and NGOs and public sector.
1-1 Linkage of UNCCD to other global conventions, and national
efforts
Egypt committed itself to the other two UN conventions which are closely
linked; the UN Convention on Biological Diversity (UNCBD) and UN
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) Besides UNCCD. The
UNCBD recognizes that biological diversity is about more than plants, animals,
micro-organisms, and their ecosystems, it is about people and their need for food
security, medicines, fresh air and water, shelter, and a clean and healthy
environment in which to live. This convention was signed by 150 government
leaders at the 1992 Rio Earth Summit. Egypt joined the UNCBD and formulated
its National Biodiversity Strategy and action plan in 1998.
Egypt ratified the UN Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD) in
1995. The overall Egyptian National Coordination Committee (NCC) was
formulated to implement the convention. This committee was chaired by Minister
of Agriculture and Land Reclamation and made up of distinguished
representatives of concerned ministries including, Agriculture and Land
Reclamation, Water Resources and Irrigation, Foreign Affairs, Local
Development, Higher Education and Scientific Research, Environmental Affairs,
Planning and International Cooperation, in addition to representatives of
parliament, NGO's as well as a group of professional experts in the concerned
fields. Recently, this committee was chaired by the Ministry of Agriculture and
Land Reclamation and representatives of the most of ministries.
With 198 members – countries, the UNFCCC sets an overall framework for

--- Page 26 ---
Desert Research Center
18
inter-governmental efforts to tackle the challenge posed by climate change. It
recognizes that the climate system is shared resource whose stability can be
affected by industrial and other emissions of CO and other greenhouse gases. As
2
a party to the Convention since 1999, Egypt developed the National Adaptation
Program of Action (NAPA) to mitigate the effects of climate change and in
consultation with governmental authorities and stakeholders formulated the
national framework strategy on climate change. As known, tackling climate
change is one of the great challenges that centered on global warming and its
consequences and reducing global emissions can be approached through the
endorsed role played by the government, consumers and business men to achieve
this target. The government focuses on initiated programs to meet its share and
encouraging the people to think environmentally. These programs put forward a
number of interesting and useful recommendations to manage and control the
process in a cost – effective way, put in place short and long term solutions and
maximize the gains in terms of new markets and increased competitiveness while
reducing global emissions. They considered a range of policies and approaches
designed to encourage all regions and sizes of business to respond to the climate
change challenge while retaining the valuable business tool of flexibility. These
approaches were seen as the first step and we are on track to reach the target. The
programs decision was based on the precautionary principles and took on account
the scientific knowledge which indicated the severe risk of irreversible climate
change. In brief, integration and synergy of environmental dimension in other
polices and highlighted climate change, energy, water resources, agriculture and
transportation are essential and urgently needed.
In September 2015, the global community agreed on “The 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, including 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)
and 169 targets. Egypt actively participated in the formulation of these goals and
targets. The global sustainable development goals have focused on achieving
human dignity without excluding anyone, wherever they are, from the fruits of
development. They also seek, in their content, to end poverty and hunger in all
their forms and dimensions, and ensure the right of all human beings to employ
their potential in a framework of justice, equality and a healthy climate, in addition
to protecting the planet from environmental degradation to ensure the
sustainability of natural resources.
As a matter of fact, land degradation and drought are essentially influenced

--- Page 27 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 19
by climate change and create detrimental impact on biodiversity and is certainly
associated with chain of events including loss of productive lands, affecting
ecologically fragile lands and destruction of natural vegetation. Accordingly,
desertification, climate change and loss of biodiversity are closely interconnected;
their implementation requires a synergy of efforts of UNCCD with UNCBD and
UNFCCC. Meanwhile, their consequences on the environmental components
(ecosystem, techno-system and socio-system) should be fairly considered. For
convenience, the physio-anthropogenic complexity of desertification processes
including the irrational use of land, water and vegetal resources beside climatic
trigger contributes effectively to less cultivatable land, less fodder and food
production, less animal proteins, low economic potential, poverty, malnutrition
and famine. Therefore, Egypt affirmed its commitment to contribute fully to the
implementation of UNCCD within a sound overarching policy of long term
sustainable development to yield multiple benefits at national level.
In the years 2005 and 2014, Egypt has prepared its two national action plans
(NAP) to combat drought and desertification and promoted many initiatives to
increase public awareness of factual desertification hazards. Since then
Institutional Integration has been improved and strengthened and progress in
environmental planning is being achieved through preparation of a strategy to
promote sustainable development at both ministerial and administrative levels.
Despite the real progress in NAP implementation, much remains to be done in
view of the continuity of high pressures on natural resources and the limited
capacity to draw up, carry out and account for development programs at the
regional and local levels. Meanwhile, environmental information especially
monitoring systems should be reviewed for relevance and consistency:
availability of environmentally relevant information is weak; integration of
regional data at national level suffers from insufficient harmonization and
problems with data flows; citizens are often unaware of desertification and its
environmental and socio-economic impact and hazards. Therefore, efforts to
develop capacity building, public awareness and participation, environmental
education and training, legislation, strengthening of institutional framework for
favorable development and reorientation of resources toward institutions that
combat desertification as well as promotion of policies to support the various tasks
of implementing the convention in the affected regions have attracted the attention
from scientists and decision makers. Nevertheless, these efforts are still uneven
across the country, particularly in less developed regions drastically affected by

--- Page 28 ---
Desert Research Center
20
desertification.
Some 1.5% of Egypt's territory is vulnerable to desertification (about 3.6
million Feddans, Feddan = 4200 m2) equal about 1.5 million hectares, primarily
in the northern portion of Nile Delta (lands cultivated for centuries) which suffers
from the worst soil degradation, including salinization. The government
proclaimed a state of emergency for seawater intrusion in such region.
Urbanization, irrational uses of land, water and vegetal resources as well as
overgrazing of pastures and poor management practices, wind and water erosion
under the prevailing aridity are found in numerous regions. Studies were
conducted in the hot spot areas most affected by desertification to develop a set
of desertification indicators to help identify priorities for action.
The NAP identifies four priority aspects: Soil and water resources
protection, sustainable water and soil management, reduction of the impact of
productive activities particularly agriculture and land restoration (including
measures such as recovery of soils damaged by erosion). The Egyptian Committee
has promoted many initiators to increase public awareness and disseminate
information on desertification.
A national observatory on desertification is already established to study and
monitor desertification and promote international partnership. Central
information unit was created to gather and disseminate national and international
data and information on land degradation.
The present updated NAP based on the progress reports in the last 10 years,
particularly since the previous NAP was dedicated. As planned, the relevant
deliverables of the NAP are:
1. Activities related to desertification including studies (factors and processes
involved in this phenomenon), mapping of the physical environment and risk
conditions as well as the impact assessment of plans and projects.
2. Extended and improved monitoring of desertification through vulnerability
mapping area of risk sensitiveness to desertification within the frame of
database.
3. Prevention of desertification and further expansion of land degradation
through:
- Land and water technology development for the best management
practices.

--- Page 29 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 21
- Promotion of water saving technology and conservation.
- Sustainable management system for irrigated agriculture.
- Implementing balanced fertilization and manuring.
- Improve land use planning.
- Ensure implementation of existing legislation to prevent and control the
misuse of productive lands (terrain) and maintaining integrity of
ecosystem.
- Prevent constructed building on the agricultural lands without permit,
- Initiating comprehensive resource projects and studies directed to
mitigating the effects of land degradation and drought.
- Capacity building and development of farmer's association and
cooperatives.
- Establishing and rehabilitation of small-scale irrigation projects.
4. Water quality monitoring focusing on groundwater, sludge water and
industrial waste water.
5. Evaluation and adoption of improved farming practices on soil and water
resources.
6. Construction and installation of forecasting and early warning system.
7. Enhancing agricultural production through sustainable use of shallow and deep
groundwater.
8. Integrated soil and water conservation.
9. Establish an intelligent decision support for environmental hazards
management using GIS and remote sensing.
10. Production of audio-video materials, articles, technical papers, manual,
brochures and training manuals.
11. Promote citizens and public awareness on desertification hazards and risk
supporting and strengthening in education in schools and universities with an
emphasis on lessons learned.
12. Adoption of practical measures to include environmental protection
disciplines.
13. Incorporation of traditional wisdom into modern knowledge about
desertification.
14. Promote the creation of environmental – related jobs.
1-2 Overview of Egypt’s NAP 2014-2024 and the main
achievements

--- Page 30 ---
Desert Research Center
22
The National Action Plan of Egypt (NAP) for (2014-2024) was submitted
to the Secretariat of the UNCCD in May, 2014 by the Desert Research Center,
(Ministry of Agriculture and Land Reclamation), the Focal Point of the UNCCD
in Egypt, to fulfil the requirements of the UNCCD under its Articles 9 and 10.
This work was done under partenariat of the Ministry of Agriculture and
Land reclamation, Desert Research Center (the focal point of the UNCCD in
Egypt) in collaboration with: Executive Authority for Land Protection closed to
MALR, Ministry of Environment (Egyptian Environmental Affairs Agency,
EEAA), Ministry of Water Resources and Irrigation, National Authority for
Remote Sensing and Space Science (NARSS), Ministry of Foreign Affairs and,
Ministry of Local Development.
The Egyptian National Action Plan 2014-2024 is purposeful on sustainable
management of land degradation which has been achieved through the following
main programs:
1-2-1 Thematic Programs
• Desertification Assessment and Monitoring
- Measuring the types and degrees of desertification and monitor their
extension in the four agro-ecological zones in Egypt,
- Producing thematic maps and creation of relevant indicators to inform
stakeholders and decision-makers regularly with the scope of the
desertification phenomena,
- Setting up a system to monitor the impact of desertification.
• Capacity Building
- Self-assessment of national capacity building needs to help stakeholders,
- Measure their capabilities,
- Define their priorities and constraints to develop manpower in
environmental management overall the country.
1-2-2 Programs for irrigated agriculture
• Irrigation development
To develop irrigation water management and increase agricultural productivity
of Egypt's old lands taking into considerations the irrigation delivery
system, on the farm level, technical, economic, environmental and social
factors impacting water management. The developed irrigation system was
practiced on old agricultural lands and newly reclaimed areas.
• The integrated irrigation management plan (IMP).
- Preparation and implementation of integrated water management plan.

--- Page 31 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 23
- Expansion and up- scaling of water user organization.
- Irrigation and drainage infrastructure and facilities.
- Environmental management & on farm improved water use.
• Soil improvement
Application of amendments, sub-soiling, land levelling and improvement of
drainage and other management practices that increase the land productivity in
the Nile Delta and Valley as well as the newly reclaimed lands.
• Water and soil pollution control
- Survey and monitor the locations to study the impacts of industrial
pollutants discharged to water and soil resources.
- Initiating database of pollution sources, types of pollutants, extension
migration and impacts.
- Applying the technologies to treat minimize and curtail the discharge.
• Use of treated sewage water for afforestation
Some selected remote areas of desert lands close to waste water treatment plants
to dispose waste water for afforestation and prevent its hazardous effect.
1-2-3 Programs of rehabilitation, conservation and use of rangeland
• Revegetation of degraded rangeland
Revegetation / reseeding and / or planting of seedlings of the perennial
fodder shrubs to increase forage and livestock production.
• Conservation of soil and water resources
- The areas suggested for this sub-project are W. Al-Arish, SW Sinai, W.
Hederba and W. Halayeb where soil and water conservation including
control of wind & water erosion, securing soil fertility & stability and
increasing water use efficiency.
- Construction of sizeable dams, gully plugs, contour terracing trenches,
furrows pitting & water harvesting, management of watershed areas, etc.
• Grazing Management
The sub-project aims at improving rangeland communities, livestock
performance, soil stability and watershed management, restoring vigor of
forage plants and improve grazing schedule. This program will be devoted
to North Coastal Zone, Sinai and Shalateen-Halayeb district.
1-2-4 Programs of rain-fed agriculture
• Land Use Planning

--- Page 32 ---
Desert Research Center
24
Scheduling land use patterns for the northern coastal zone to include
rehabilitation of rangeland, rain-fed agriculture, desertification activities,
expansion of touristic resorts and infrastructures for urban, travel and
industrial activities.
• Soil Erosion Control
This sub-project focused on soil erosion rates by water and wind in the
NCZ, preparing a data base on erosion to find out the most efficient
methods for controlling soil erosion and maintain soil conservation for
sustainable use. Concerning wind erosion, two sub-projects focused on two
Agr-ecologecal zones; The Oases in Western Desert (The determination of
wind erosion and, precipitation and economic measures to combat
desertification factors in the Oases areas. Such project focused on
monitoring and evaluation of both erosion and precipitation by wind as well
as selecting the appropriate measures for controlling them. The second one
carried in NWC (Using and verifying modified wind erosion equation
under NWCZ). It was focused on fitting the equation under this area and
applied it for chose the optimum measures for controlling soil erosion by
wind.
• Improving Livestock Performance
This sub-project aimed to increase animal productivity through cross-
breeding and veterinary services, provide green fodders (silage). Also, to
save losses in feeds and other practices to improve nutritive value and feed
conversion efficiency to improve animal productivity and maximize
profitability.
• Improving Small Ruminant Production in North Sinai
This sub-project includes improving feeding and nutritional value through
biotechnology of agricultural residues, fodder shrubs, natural rangeland,
improving animal management as well as veterinary care and protection of
livestock from endemic diseases and malnutrition to increase animal
productivity and sustainability.
1-2-5 Programs for sand dunes fixation
• Control of sand encroachment on High Dam Lake

--- Page 33 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 25
This sub-project aims at control sand movement on the High Dam Lake via
establishing successive green belts crossing the main wind direction. This
will also contribute to improvement of local climate and environmental
conditions.
• Fixation of sand dune in Siwa Oasis
This sub-project deals with controlling sand encroachment on Siwa Oasis
using mechanical, chemical and biological measures. This also includes the
use of agriculture drainage water in fixation the sand dunes to alleviate
drainage problem in the Oasis, in addition to transfer the sand dunes
ecosystem to agricultural productive lands.
• Fixation of shifting sand dunes in North Sinai
The objective of this sub-project is formulating a master plan for the control
of shifting dunes in north Sinai and to establish some pilot areas to test the
biological measures for dunes fixation and their proper management
practices.
2- Rational for preparing Egypt’s NAP 2024-2030

--- Page 34 ---
Desert Research Center
26
In September 2015, the global community agreed on “The 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, including 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)
and 169 targets. Egypt actively participated in the formulation of these goals and
targets. The global sustainable development goals have focused on achieving
human dignity without excluding anyone, wherever they are, from the fruits of
development. They also seek, in their content, to end poverty and hunger in all
their forms and dimensions, and ensure the right of all human beings to employ
their potential in a framework of justice, equality and a healthy climate, in addition
to protecting the planet from environmental degradation to ensure the
sustainability of natural resources.
Goal 15 (Life on Land) urges countries to protect, restore and promote sustainable
use of terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably manage forests, combat desertification,
and halt and reverse land degradation and halt biodiversity loss. This goal is
consistent with the objectives and mechanisms of action of the three United
Nations Conventions (Rio Conventions).
Target 15.3 aims to “combat desertification, restore degraded land and soil,
including land affected by desertification, drought and floods, and strive to
achieve a land degradation-neutral world” by 2030. This target is consistent with
the objectives and mechanisms of action of the United Nations Convention to
Combat Desertification (UNCCD).
At the 12th session of the Conference of Parties (COP.12) of the UNCCD,
held in Ankara, Turkey in October 2015, the Parties endorsed SDG target 15.3,
which includes the concept of land degradation neutrality (LDN), as a strong
vehicle for driving the implementation of the convention (decision 3/COP 12).
Also, on the basis of SDGs, Egypt formulates Sustainable Development
Strategy, "Egypt Vision 2030", which includes three pillars; Economic,
Environmental, Social dimensions. The environmental pillar includes the
conservation and proper management of natural resources and control the
deterioration of such resources. It also includes the integrated management and
reduce the pollution of air, soil and water.
At the 13th session of the Conference of the Parties (COP 13) to the UNCCD
in September 2017, parties to the convention adopted the UNCCD 2018 - 2030
Strategic Framework to enhance the implementation of the convention
(ICCD/COP(13)/21/Add.1).

--- Page 35 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 27
This new strategy is a tool to effectively respond to new challenges and
opportunities in the global context. Its purpose is to establish a global partnership
to halt and prevent desertification, land degradation and to mitigate the effects of
drought in affected areas in order to support desertification reduction and
environmental sustainability.
The UNCCD 2018 - 2030 strategic objectives are reviewed as follows:
Strategic objective 1: To improve the conditions of affected ecosystems, combat
desertification/ land degradation, promote sustainable
land management and contribute to Land Degradation
Neutrality (LDN).
Strategic objective 2: To improve the living conditions of affected populations.
Strategic objective 3: To mitigate, adapt to, and manage the effects of drought in
order to enhance resilience of vulnerable populations
and ecosystems.
Strategic objective 4: To generate global benefits through effective
implementation of the United Nations Convention to
Combat Desertification.
Strategic objective 5: To mobilize substantial and additional financial and non-
financial resources to support the implementation of the
Convention by building effective partnerships at global
and national level.
Moreover, the UNCCD faces different opportunities and constraints that
will determine its implementation in the forthcoming decades due to the
significant changes of policy environment since Rio conventions adopted the
Sustainable Development Goals in 2015, raising the support to developing
countries, worldwide commitment to climate change mitigation and adaptation,
growing numbers of refugees and environmental migrants shedding more light
on the impacts of poverty and environmental degradation.
At the country level, one of the constraints that Egypt encountered was the
inadequate institutional structure to the effective implementation of programs and
projects indicated in Egypt NAP 2005-2014. Another challenge was the
insufficient financing for the NAP's programs and projects. Also, donors have

--- Page 36 ---
Desert Research Center
28
geared their financing strategies to support country-identified priorities based on
the poverty alleviation strategy and other country-led development planning tools.
During 2017, Egypt set the necessary national goals and measures to land
degradation neutrality to be achieved by 2030 as one of the prominent countries
in combating desertification at the global level.
Over the past five years, various socio-economic and environmental
challenges have risen, i.e., overpopulation, water scarcity, climate change, Coved
19 together with other international and regional conflicts and crises.
Accordingly, Egypt – as an affected country - has to prepare its National Action
Plan (NAP) to combat desertification, land degradation and drought 2024 – 2030
in line with the recent UNCCD 2018 - 2030 strategic objectives. This implies the
revision and updating and preparing Egypt's NAP 2024 to 2030.
In the updating process of NAP to combat desertification, land degradation
and drought for 2024-2030, a participatory approach was carried out in
accordance with the UNCCD requirement. Articles 9 and 10 of the UNCCD state
that the affected country party is to prepare and make public the NAP and specify
the respective roles of government, local communities and land users as well as
the required available resources. In view of this, a series of consultation
meetings and workshops were held in different parts of the country.
Therefore, the NAP 2024-2030 is a working document for the synergy
among the three Multilateral Environmental Agreements (MEAs) on
Biodiversity, Climate Change and Land Degradation at the country level, and the
convergence of action among national government agencies (NGAs), Local
Government Units (LGUs), and Civil Society Organizations (CSOs) under the
supervision of MALR/ Desert Research Center, the Egyptian Focal Point of
UNCCD, to contribute to hunger mitigation, poverty reduction, and
environmental sustainability.
3- Country profile
3-1 Location and topography

--- Page 37 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 29
Egypt has a total area of about one million Km2 located within the arid to
hyper arid climatic zones of North Africa of which only a small portion, not
exceeding 5.5% of total area, is agriculturally productive lands. Egypt can be
considered African/Asian/Mediterranean country, most of its area (94%) occupies
the northeastern corner of Africa and 6% is the Sinai Peninsula which is part of
Asia.
It is a densely populated country with more than 105 million inhabitants in
2023, mainly concentrated on an absolutely small territory around the Nile Valley
and Delta with regional disparities based on main water resources from the Nile
River. The high population densities lead to eventual environmental pressures
which, together with the diversity and sensitivity of the natural parsimony and
cultural heritage have made environmental protection a matter of serious public
concern. Among the environmental issues of prime importance, air and water
pollution, soil and water management, waste management, climate change,
coastal erosion and marine environment are of major concern.
Egypt has coastlines on both the Mediterranean Sea and the Red Sea. Egypt
borders Libya to the west, the Gaza Strip to the northeast, and Sudan to the south,
(Fig. 3-1). The domain Egyptian Land is desert interrupted by the Nile Valley and
Delta land .The land surface rises up on both sides of the valley to reach around
800 m above sea level in the western side and around 1000 m above sea level in
the eastern side. The relief is characterized by low-lying sand dunes cover and
depressions of the Western Deserts. East of the Nile valley, the arid Arabian
Desert expands to the borders of the Red Sea. In the far southwest, the land rises
into the Gilf Kebir plateau, with elevations near 1000 m above sea level. In the
far southeast, the Red Sea Mountains, an extension of the Ethiopian Highlands,
continue on into Sudan. The highest elevation, located at Mount Catherine in the
Sinai, is 2614 m above sea level and the lowest elevation, at the Qattara
Depression in the northwest, is 139 m below sea level.

--- Page 38 ---
Desert Research Center
30
Fig. (3-1): Location map of Egypt
3-2 Climate
The climate of Egypt is relatively wet and cool in winter (October to March)
and dry and hot in summer (April–September). The four seasons show
geographical and temporal variety due to the country’s significant regional and
temporal variability in climate. Egypt’s location and topography play a role in the
distribution of rainfall and temperature. The rainfall in Egypt is relatively high in
the coastal area along the Mediterranean Sea in the north (> 200 mm/year) and
the Red Sea in the east than in the inland areas. Most areas in the south and west
of Egypt, a part of the Sahara, receive an average rainfall of below 5 mm. Rainfall
in the north is influenced by the North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO) and the East
Atlantic–West Russia index. Furthermore, temperature varies in Egypt by
location and altitude. The temperature generally gets cooler in the north than in
the south. The mean temperature in the north is around 20 °C, while 25.9 °C in
the south. However, the temperature in higher elevation lands, such as Saint
Catherine Mountain, may reach subzero in winter.
Egypt’s climate showed a rapid change in recent years. The maximum
temperature has increased from 0.07 to 0.24 °C/decade and the minimum
temperature by 0.08–0.29 °C/decade in the last five decades. At the same time,
the rainfall decreased up to − 5.00 mm/decade in the Nile Delta.

--- Page 39 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 31
3-3 Soil resources
Soil resources in Egypt include a number of soil associations that differ
from each other in characteristics and suitability for agriculture (FAO/UNESCO
1998). (Figure 3-2) shows the geographical distribution of the different major soil
associations in Egypt. (Table 3-1) manifests areas and the percentage of each, out
of the total area.
Fig. (3-2): Geographical distribution of the different major soil associations in Egypt –
(FAO/UNESCO 1998)

--- Page 40 ---
Desert Research Center
32
Table (3-1): Different soil associations, their areas and percentages in Egypt
Area
Soil Associations (%)
(1,000 Feddans)
1- Lithosol 34363 15.76
2- Calcaric fluviosols 13400 6.14
3- Calcaric Regosols 729 0.33
4- Eutric Regosols 3828 1.76
5- Haplic xerosols 270 0.12
6- Yermosols 44888 20.58
7- CalcaricYermosols 3244 1.49
8- GleyicYermosols 78200 35.87
9- Gleyic Solonchaks 1342 0.62
10- Orthic Solonchaks 4979 2.28
11- Takyric Solonchaks 502 0.23
12- Rock Debris 225 0.1
13- Dunes/Shifting sand 32100 14.72
Source: (FAO/UNESCO 1998), 1 Feddan = 4200 m2
3-4 Water resources
Water is one of the most important natural resources, as it is an essential
component of all development activities and a source of renewable energy. Water
is also one of the most significant elements of the ecosystem and one of Egypt’s
development axes. Water resources are scarce in Egypt; the Nile River is the main
source of water and the other sources represent about 7 % of the water resources
in the country (Ministry of Water Resources and Irrigation, 2010).
The Nile River is the main source of water in Egypt; it represents about 93
% of water resources, while the other sources represent only about 7 %. Egypt's
water resources are divided into 59.68 billion cubic meters per year of used
freshwater, and 21.38 billion cubic meters per year of unconventional sources,
most of which are reused water.
Reused water includes treated agricultural and sewage water, as well as
shallow groundwater, which is water seepage from agricultural lands and
waterways. All these are estimated at 21.38 billion cubic meters per year, divided
as follows: (a) shallow groundwater in the Delta about 7.87 billion cubic meters
annually; (b) reuse of agricultural wastewater in the Delta about 8.38 billion cubic
meters annually; and (c) reuse of treated sewage water about 5.13 billion cubic
meters annually, while desalinated seawater is estimated at 0.38 billion cubic
meters annually.

--- Page 41 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 33
Figure (3-3) shows the relative distribution of Egypt’s available water
resources during 2019/2020. The Nile River’s share of water represents 68.5 % of
Egypt's total conventional and non-conventional water resources. Water resources
from deep groundwater, rain, and floodwater as well as desalinated seawater only
account for about 7 % of its total water resources. The rest are the non-
conventional water resources resulting from the reuse of wastewater and shallow
groundwater.
Water uses in Egypt are distributed among the agricultural sector,
accounting for 76 % of the total annual water use, 20.9 % for other sectors, and
finally, 3.1 % of the waterways evaporate. The total water usage in Egypt is
estimated at 81.26 billion cubic meters per annum (including losses by
evaporation). Figure (3-4) shows the relative distribution of water use in Egypt
during 2019/2020. The agricultural sector is the largest water consumer with
nearly 76 % of the total annual water usage in Egypt. On the other hand, the
industrial sector consumes much less water than the agricultural sector, at a rate
of approximately 6.7 % of the total annual water usage in the country.
Water policies in Egypt have evolved towards an integrated water
management approach, through the Water Resources Strategy 2050; a shift
towards adapting to water scarcity, rationalizing its consumption, and linking
water resources management to energy and food. The Second National Water
Resources Plan (2017- 2037) aims to achieve “water security for all” through four
main axes: improving water quality, rationalizing water use, developing water
resources, and finally, creating a suitable environment for integrated water
management and planning and implementation. This plan is in line with Egypt’s
Vision 2030, which aims to raise agricultural and industrial wastewater resource
efficiency by 80 % by 2030 and improve access to sanitation to reach an estimated
88.7 % by 2030.

--- Page 42 ---
Desert Research Center
34
Fig. (3-3): Relative distribution of water resources in Egypt during 2019/2020
(Ministry of Water Resources and Irrigation, 2020)
Fig. (3-4): Relative distribution of water use in Egypt during 2019/2020
(Ministry of Water Resources and Irrigation, 2020)
3-5 Natural vegetation resources
Apart from the Western Coastal Mediterranean narrow belt which enjoys a
relatively higher rainfall than the inner desert, the present-day plant life in the
Western Desert of Egypt constitutes a part of the vegetation of the Sahara with a
few endemic species known from Kharga Oasis and one near endemic genus from
Dungul and Nakhila Oases. As a result of the climatic changes, the ancient
vegetation of the Western Desert which was a Savanna type during the Early and

--- Page 43 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 35
Middle Holocene was degraded into a hyper arid zone, poor in diversity and plant
cover. The recent prolonged periods of drought, especially in Gilf El-Kebir and
Gebel Oweinat, which often last for more than one decade, brought drastic losses
to the vegetation and probably resulted in the extinction of some species.
The plant life in the Eastern Desert is much richer than that of the Western
Desert. The flora of the northern wadis and mountains of the Eastern Desert west
of the Gulf of Suez has strong relations with that of the Sinai Peninsula.
The southern region of Gebel Elba, the only part of Egypt which lies within
the Sahel regional transition zone, has a rich plant life including some Sahelian
woody elements which are not known elsewhere from Egypt.
The Sinai Peninsula, although occupying only 6.1% of the area of Egypt,
has 56.2% of the taxa of vascular plants of the entire flora, and 51.4% of the
endemics of Egypt (Boulos, 2008).
3-6 Agriculture
3-6-1 Cultivated area
The total area of cultivated land is about 9.7 million Feddans, 81% of
which is located in the Nile River Valley and Delta, and the rest lies in the desert
governorates, especially in the New Valley and Matrouh Governorates (Table
3-2). It is worth noting that the old agricultural lands in the Nile River basin
floodplain occupy about 63% of this area and the rest, estimated at about 3.4
million Feddans, are the newly reclaimed lands at the borders of the Nile
Valley, especially in East and West Delta.
The old lands witnessed a decrease estimated at more than 500,000
Feddans during 2002 - 2019, due to urban expansion at the expense of
agricultural lands. On the other hand, the new lands witnessed an increase
of about 1.8 million Feddans, within the context of the efforts made to
reclaim more lands through establishment agro-developing mega projects to
meet the growing demand for food (Table 3-3).
3-6-2 Crop composition and crop area
Agricultural land crop composition includes the crop group comprising
different cropping patterns for strategic cereals i.e. wheat, rice, corn; fiber crops
such mainly cotton; fodder crops; and vegetable crops encompassing tomatoes,
cucumbers, onions, and potatoes; in addition to, fruit and palm trees with

--- Page 44 ---
Desert Research Center
36
occupancy rates of 75%, 13%, and 12% respectively (Table 3-4). These main
seasonally crops are cultivated throughout the year on a crop area estimated at
about 16 million Feddans, with a crop density of 1.7 %.
3-6-3 Production of agricultural land
Agricultural lands produce food from plant, animal, and fish sources as
follows:
• Plant sources: agricultural land production is estimated at 22 million Tons of
grains; 30 million Tons of sugar crops; more than 52 million Tons of fodders;
21 million Tons of vegetables; and 13 million Tons of fruits (Table 3-4).
• Animal sources: the number of cattle, sheep, and goats that live on produced
fodders by agricultural lands is estimated at about 7.4 million heads producing
about 726 thousand Tons of meat and about 6 million Tons of dairy (Table 3-
5). Poultry production is estimated at about 1.7 million Tons (gross weight)
of white meat and about 14 million eggs annually.
• Production of fish stocks: the total fish production from various fisheries
is estimated at about 2 million Tons, most of which (78%) is from fish
farms and rice fields, while production from marine sources represents
about 5%, and from lakes approximately 13%. Meanwhile, production
from the Nile River fresh water, canals, and drains does not exceed 4%
(Table 3-6).
Table (3-2): The cultivated area in Egyptian regions
Region Cultivated areas (%)
(1000 Feddans)
Nile Valley and Delta Governorates
- Lower Egypt. 4937.8 49.8
- Middle Egypt. 1445.5 15.5
- Upper Egypt. 1449.8 15.6
Sub - total 7533.1 80.9
Desert Governorates
- Red sea. 6.2 0.1
- New Valley. 507.7 5.4
- Matrouh. 219.9 2.4
- North Sinai. 24.6 0.3
- South Sinai 45.4 0.5
- Nobaria 983.9 10.4
Sub - Total 1787.7 19.1
Grand Total 9320.8 100
Source: CAPMAS (2023), Ref. No. 71-22122-2021

--- Page 45 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 37
Table (3-3): The development of the cultivated area in the new and old lands
Year Area (1000 Feddans)
Old land New land Total
2002 6487.2 1661.1 8148.3
2005 6648.3 1736.4 8384.7
2010 6117.7 2623.4 8741.1
2015 6156.0 2939.9 9095.9
2019 5916.2 3416.6 9332.8
Source: CAPMAS (2022), Ref. No. 71-01111-2022
Table (3-4): Area and production of the most important agricultural crops
Crop Area Production
(1000 Feddans) (1000 Tons)
1- Cereals
- Wheat. 3419 9842
- Maize. 2443 8035
- Rice. 1105 4242
2- Legumes
- Beans. 126 216
- Lentil. 516 1
3- Sugar Crops
- Sugar beet. 683 14195
- Sugar cane. 342 15959
4- Fodder crops
- Clover. 1553 44672
- Green fodders. 125 7613
5- Fiber crops
- Cotton. 238 305
6- Onion and garlic
- Onion. 250 3618
- Garlic. 45 446
7- Oil crops 328 252
8- Vegetables 1950 21347
9- Fruits
- Date palm. 141 1714
- Fruits. 1674 11628
Source: CAPMAS (2023), Ref No 71-22122-2021
Table (3-5): Livestock numbers and their meat and dairy production
Kind Numbers Meat quantities Dairy quantities
(1000 heads) (1000 Tons) (1000 Tons)
Cows 2812 419 4794
Buffaloes 1428 203 1337
Sheeps 1938 54 -
Goats 1130 20 34
Camels 239 30 31
Source: CAPMAS (2023), Ref No 71-22111-2021

--- Page 46 ---
Desert Research Center
38
Table (3-6): Fish production from various fisheries
Source Production quantity %
(1000 Tons)
Marine water 95.6 4.8
Lakes 255.6 12.8
Fresh water 74.5 3.7
Fish farms 1570.7 78.4
Rice fields 5.5 0.3
Total 2001.9 100
Source: CAPMAS (2023), Ref. No. 71-22112-2021
3-6-4 Self-sufficiency of some agricultural commodities
Agricultural commodities productivity has achieved different rates of self-
sufficient. About 48 % self-sufficient has been achieved in wheat production,
98% in rice in the grains group, about 22.8 % in the beans group, 107 % in
vegetables, and 99 % in fruits. Furthermore, the self-sufficient 57% for meat,
97% for poultry, 90% for fish and about 100 % for eggs and milk, respectively
(Table 3-7). This asserts the importance of land productivity in providing a great
deal of food self-sufficient in Egypt.
3-6-5 Total value and net income of agricultural production
From an economic perspective, the value of agricultural products from
various sources is estimated at LE 740 billion. Plant production contributed about
54%, animal production about 36%, and fish production about 10%. After
deducting production requirements value, the net income from agricultural land
resources is estimated at approximately LE 443 billion (Table 3-8).
Table (3-7): Self-sufficiency percentage of some agriculture commodities
Food commodities Self-sufficiency (%)
Wheat 48.2
Maize 46.0
Rice 98.0
Beans 22.8
Vegetable 106.9
Fruits 98.8
Red meat 56.6
Poultry 97.4
Fish 89.9
Eggs 100.0
Milk 100.4
Source: CAPMAS (2023), Ref. No. 71-01112-2023

--- Page 47 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 39
Table (3-8) Agriculture production value and income
Items Production value %
(1000000 LE)
1- Agriculture value
- Plant production. 406344 54
- Animal and insect production. 266526 36
- Fish production. 67539 10
Total 740409 100
2- Cost production in puts 297798
Net agriculture income 442611
Source: CAPMAS (2023), Ref. No. 71-01112-2023.
3-7 Demography
Egypt is the most populous country in the Middle East, and the fourth-most
populous on the African continent, after Nigeria, Ethiopia and Democratic
Republic of the Congo. About 95 % of the country's 104 million people (July
2023) live along the banks of the Nile and in the Nile Delta, which fans out north
of Cairo; and along the Suez Canal. These regions are among the world's most
densely populated, containing an average of over 1,540 people per km2, as
compared to 96 persons per km2 for the country as a whole.
Small communities spread throughout the desert regions of Egypt are
clustered around historic trade and transportation routes. The government has
tried with mixed success to encourage migration to newly irrigated land reclaimed
from the desert. However, the proportion of the population living in rural areas
has continued to decrease as people move to the megacities in search of
employment and a higher standard of living.
The basic problem, Egypt has an unemployment rate driven by a
demographic youth bulge: with the number of new people entering the job force
at about 4% / year, unemployment in Egypt is almost 10 times as high for college
graduates. An estimated 51.2% of Egyptians are under the age of 25, with just
4.3% over the age of 65, making it one of the most youthful populations in the
world (Fig. 3-5).

--- Page 48 ---
Desert Research Center
40
Fig. (3-5): Population pyramid of Egypt in 2020
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Demographics_of_Egypt
3-8 Economics
Egypt’s economic structure is one of the most developed and diversified
among the African and Middle East Countries. It has a large industry sector, an
essential primary sector and a fast evolving service sector.
Agriculture used to be the mainstay for the Egyptian economy. However,
with rapid industrialization, its share has been reduced to 13.1 % of GDP in 2010.
In the 1970s, agriculture used to employ more than 90 % of the Egyptian working
population. Today, it only employs 32 % of the labor force.
The industrial sector employs approximately 17 % of the labor force and
contributes 37 % of GDP. Egypt has a range of industries, such as steel, electricity,
oil extraction and refinery, chemicals, domestic goods and automobiles. The IT
industry is also gradually expanding in the region.

--- Page 49 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 41
The service sector is the largest contributor to the Egyptian economy, with
a contribution in excess of 49 %. Also, it offers employment to almost 50 % of
the population. The major service sector areas are construction, tourism, canal
trade and administrative jobs. (Fig 3.6)
Fig. (3-6): GDP comparison by sectors
3-9 Agro-ecological zones
Egypt has been distinguished into four Agro-ecological zones on the basis
of climate in combination with the physiography, natural resources, agriculture
and other factors affecting the socio-economic activities. This approach would
facilitate the investigation and identification of the active factors of
desertification; their impacts; capacity building needs; participating stakeholders;
required legislations; economic tools and social implications. It would also
facilitate the selection of indicators and measures for monitoring ongoing and
future desertification processes. These zones are given below
(Fig. 3-7). Also, these agro-ecological zones have specific attributes of resource
base, climatic features, terrain and geomorphic characteristics, land use patterns
and socio-economic implications. Since significant variations in the
environmental characteristics are apparent in each zone, the active factors and
processes of land degradation and their impact are necessarily variable.

--- Page 50 ---
Desert Research Center
42
t
p
y
g
E
f
o
s
e
n
o
Z
l
a
c
i
g
o
l
o
c
e
-
o
r
g
A
:
)
7
-
3
(
.
g
i
F

--- Page 51 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 43
3-9-1 Nile Valley and Delta
This zone is distinguished into two sectors: (i) The Nile Delta and its
vicinities, with latitude 29° N as southern boundary except for the north coastal
belt, the area corresponds roughly to the accentuated arid province with 20 to 100
mm annual rainfall, and (ii) The Nile Valley and the surrounding reclaimed areas
which are almost rainless; roughly belongs to the hyper-arid province. It includes
the most of population and economic activities (Agriculture, industry …etc.).
3-9-2 North Coastal Zone
This zone is composed of two major subzones; northwestern coast and
northeastern coast of Sinai. Such zone represents the arid province under the
maritime influence of the Mediterranean with shorter dry period (attenuated).
The northwestern coast (NWC) is characterized by dry Mediterranean
climate with an average high and low temperature of 18.1 and 8.1°C in the winter
and 29.2°C and 20°C in summer seasons, respectively. Rainfall in the
northwestern coast ranges between 105.0 mm/year at Salloum and 199.6 mm /year
at Alexandria. Data from eight stations located near the coastline show that most
of the rainfall (70 % or more) occurs within the winter months (November to
February), Mostly during December and January. The NWC area has the highest
average wind speed in Egypt in the winter which can reach 18.5 Km/h and drops
gradually inland.
The north coastal areas of Sinai are also characterized by the Mediterranean
climate with relatively rainy, cool winter and dry hot rainless summer. Air
temperature is similar to those of the NWC. The greatest amount of rainfall in
Egypt (300 mm/year) occurs on the far northeast of North Sinai (at Rafah).
Generally, about 70 % of rain along the North Coastal Zone occurs in winter and
30 % falls during the transitional months.
3-9-3 Inland Sinai and Eastern Desert
This zone is characterized by the hyper-arid conditions with a mild winter
and a hot summer. With the Exception of the coastal belt along the Gulf of Suez,
Gulf of Aqaba and the high lands of South Sinai is are characterized by a hyper-
arid province with a cool winter and hot summer.

--- Page 52 ---
Desert Research Center
44
3-9-4 Western Desert
This zone is characterized by hyper-arid climatic conditions with rare
rainfall and extremely high temperature. The northwestern and the northern winds
extend from the Mediterranean over the Western Desert with fallen speed south
wards. These winds are the major factors of erosion and deposition. The Western
Desert includes five important Oases (Siwa, Bahariya, Farafra, Dakhla and Kharga).
These isolated Oases have long supported substantial communities of people and
substantial agriculture development depending on the groundwater as well as a culture
unique from the Nile Valley.
3-10 Land cover classifications
Land cover refers to the observed physical cover of the earth’s surface
which describes the distribution of vegetation types, water bodies, bare
rocks/soils, inland water bodies and the anthropogenic impact. It also reflects the
use of land resources i.e. (soil, water and biodiversity) for agriculture, forestry,
human settlements and other purposes. It is used as a reference principle for
several processes, i.e., combating desertification, climate change, bio-diversity,
and rangeland monitoring, etc. (FAO, 2016).
According to Yossif (2019), land cover on the national level of Egypt falls
into seven broad categories (Table 3-9) which reflects climate, topography, the
availability moisture supply and water resources, and soils. In general, availability
of water resources is the most important factor. Variation between classes of land
cover is observed coming from different factors.
3-11 Rangeland
In Egypt, rangelands occupy around 10 Million Feddans and are located in
North Western Coastal Zone (3.5 Million Feddans), and (1.5 Million Feddans) in
south east corner of Eastern Desert, in addition to, 5 Million Feddans in Middle
and South Sinai. Such areas host about 1 Million heads of cheeps, goats and
camels providing about 50-60% of the fodder needs.
Rangelands are in variable conditions of desirable plant cover and
productivity. However, about 45% of the total rangeland areas is severely
degraded and could be described as very poor ranges, 35% as fair, 15% as good
and 5% as excellent ranges. The last two categories are restricted to the far from
rough topographic areas, areas lacking water points and / or areas protected by
tribes, governmental agencies or for military purposes.

--- Page 53 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 45
The general trend is shrinkage of areas and decline in quantity and quality
of forage production. Adverse changes in range plant composition, i.e., more
annuals, less palatable and more unpalatable and noxious species are reported for
most range areas. The combined effects of overgrazing, uprooting of wood plants
and extension of rain-fed cultivation have accentuated the decline in native forage
production and the deterioration of good native forage species, thus threating
biodiversity. The most areas of Western Coastal Zone and North Sinai, forage
production had declined by 50-60 % in less than 30 years and about 40-50 % of
the plant cover has been lost. These changes are mainly attributed to plowing of
the most productive range areas to cultivate barley (and sometimes wheat),
uprooting of shrubs for fuel and to increasing grazing pressure.
Table (3-9): The main classes and areas of land cover in Egypt, 2019 (Yossif,
2019)
LC area in 2019
Class name
Km2 %
Agro-forest areas 5.1 0.001
Shrubs, grasslands and sparsely vegetated areas 14252.7 1.4
Croplands 42066.2 4.2
Wetlands 10514.6 1.0
Artificial areas 3486.4 0.3
Bare lands 929552.4 92.0
Water bodies 10122.7 1.0
Total 1010000 100
The absolute values of land cover classes that varied according to land use
are arranged as follow: bare lands > crop land > shrubs, grasslands and sparsely
vegetated areas > water bodies > wet land > artificial area > Agro-forest areas.
According to the same study, land use shows that most of the country is dominated
by non-cultivated areas, classified as bare lands i.e., 92% of the total Egypt area.
The description of the main land cover types in Egypt is summarized as shown in
table (3-10).
Table (3-10): Description of different land cover classes (Yossif, 2019)

--- Page 54 ---
Desert Research Center
46
Class Description
Agro-forest Cultivated woody trees covering between 15 to 100%, mostly irrigated by
waste and/or saline water.
Shrubs, grasses Annuals, perennial grasses; perennial herbs and sub-shrubs; evergreen
and sparse non-succulent sub-shrubs, partially deciduous perennial sub-shrubs;
vegetation evergreen succulent perennial shrubs; and deciduous perennial shrubs and
scattered trees with less than 15%.
Cropland Cultivated herbaceous plants; permanent cultivated tree or shrub crops
and including Orchards, rainfed and/or irrigated.
Wetland Includes coastal mangroves, inland marshes, Peat bogs, intertidal flats,
marshes, swamps and aquatic beds. They represent the transitional zone
between terrestrial and aquatic systems, where shallow water table occurs
or land might be covered with shallow water.
Artificial areas Any urban areas i.e. parks, industrial areas, waste dump deposits;
construction sites; port, airport areas; mineral extraction, etc.
Bare land Natural abiotic surfaces (bare soil, sand, rocks, etc.), except for coastal
areas affected by the tidal movement of salt water, dunes, beaches
Water bodies Inland water bodies (year around), such as lakes and/or river. Also, areas
covered by water due to the construction of reservoirs, canals, artificial
lakes, etc.

--- Page 55 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 47
4- Desertification, land degradation and drought (DLD)
driving forces, pressures, processes and impacts in the
different Agro-Ecological Zones
Land degradation status at various levels may be determined according to
a number of axes, including: Driving factors, pressures, state, impacts and
responses (Fig. 4-1).
Fig. (4-1): General driving factors, pressures, degradation status, impacts, and responses
4-1 Land cover changes
According to (Yossif, 2019), the land cover changes for 19 years from 2000
to 2019. (Table 4-1) indicate that there was a 0.8% increase in the cropland area
as a result of land reclamation projects and 0.2% increase in the artificial areas.
Furthermore, water bodies and wetlands both recorded 0.1% rise. On the other
hand, there was a decrease in the natural vegetation areas (Shrubs, grasslands and
sparsely vegetated areas), such as areas lying on the northwestern and
northeastern coasts, central and southern Sinai, and the Eastern Desert. There was
also a 1.1 % decrease in bare land. In this regard, the results indicate that during
2000 - 2019, about 10097.2 km2 (2.4 million Feddans) were developed in the
form of land reclamation projects and the construction of new cities. On the other
hand, about 835.8 km2 (200000 Feddans) were exposed to various degradation
factors.

--- Page 56 ---
Desert Research Center
48
Table (4-1): Land cover changes during the period from 2000 to 2019
LC area in 2000 LC area in 2019 Net area change
Class name
Km2 % Km2 % Km2 %
Agro-forest
4.5 0.0004 5.1 0.001 0.6 0.00006
areas
Shrubs,
grasslands and
sparsely
15088.6 1.5 14252.7 1.4 -835.8 -0.1
vegetated areas
(Natural
vegetation)
Croplands 33989.3 3.4 42066.2 4.2 8076.8 0.8
Wetlands 9563.4 0.9 10514.6 1.0 951.2 0.1
Artificial areas 1466.0 0.1 3486.4 0.3 2020.4 0.2
Bare lands 940476.0 93.1 929552.4 92.0 -10923.6 -1.1
Water bodies 9412.4 0.9 10122.7 1.0 710.4 0.1
Total 1010000 100 1010000 100 0 0
Source: Yossif (2019)
4-2 Land degradation driving forces, pressures, processes and
impacts
The National Action Plan to Combat Desertification (DRC, 2005) indicates
that Egypt’s geographical area may be classified into four agro-ecological zones
as follows: (1) the Northern Coastal Zone; (2) Nile Delta and Valley; (3) the
Western Desert; and (4) Inland Sinai and the Eastern Desert.
Driving factors and pressures causing land degradation in the
abovementioned regions differ according to the environmental, climatic, social, and
economic conditions prevailing in each of these regions. Table (4-2) indicates the
most important driving factors and pressures causing land degradation in these
regions (Yossif, 2019).

--- Page 57 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 49
Table (4-2): The general framework for the driving factors and pressures
causing land resources degradation
Drivers Pressures
Zone 1: The Northern Coastal Zone
- Improper management of water and soil - Water scarcity
resources - Seasonal population pressure
- Overgrazing and removal of natural - Decreasing pastoralist's number
vegetation - Economical problems as a result of poverty
- Urbanization and infrastructure and wealth
development - Labor unavailability
- Wind/water erosion - Lack of support services
- Aeolian transport (sand movement)
- Climate change (Sea water intrusion, etc.)
- Drought
- Tourism activities and mining
- Lack of education and awareness
Zone 2: Nile Delta and Valley
- Improper management of water and soil - High population growth
resources - Decrease water per capita
- Climate change - Soil and water pollution
- Intensive agriculture - Poverty and low income
- Urbanization
- Soil salinization
- Land tenure
- Lack of education and awareness
- Institutional settings and policies
Zone 3: The Western Desert
- Improper management of water and soil - Water scarcity
resources - Economic problems and poverty
- Climate change - Low population density
- Soil salinization - Low funding
- Aeolian transport (Sand & Dust Storms,
"SDS")
- Wind erosion
- Lack of education and awareness
- Institutional settings and policies
Zone 4: Inland Sinai and the Eastern Desert
- Wind/water erosion - Water scarcity
- Aeolian transport (Sand & Dust Storms, - Water, soil and air pollution
"SDS") - Economic problems and poverty
- Climate change - Low population density
- Lack of education and awareness - Low funding
- Industrial and touristic activities,
waste deposition and mining
- Institutional settings and policies
In view of the aforementioned, the most important drivers and processes affecting
land resources in Egypt can be presented as follows:

--- Page 58 ---
Desert Research Center
50
4-2-1 Population growth
Population growth from 2005 to 2023 amounted to about 34.5 million
people, which was reflected in the increase in the total population density. In this
context, the total population density (people/km2 of land area) witnessed a
continuous increase (Table 4-3), reaching about 70.2 people/km2 in 2005, and
rising to 78.1 people/km2 in 2010, reached to 87 people/km2 in 2015 and 101.8
people/km2 in 2020 and increased to 104.2 people/km2 in 2023. The inhabited area
reached 68.3 thousand km2; representing 6.8 % of the total area, and the
population density therein reached about 1529 people/km2. This population
percentage in inhabited areas rises in major cities; as it is estimated at about
5610 people/km2 in Cairo and about 3277 people/km2 in Alexandria.
It is worth mentioning that continued population growth and the increase in
population density will lead to a decline in returns on development efforts, more
specifically a decline in the per capita spending on health, education, housing, and
transportation, as well as a decrease in the per capita share of agricultural land.
Population growth will also result in an increase in population density in
agricultural lands, and in competition for water and energy. Overpopulation has
had repercussions on agricultural land uses, which includes the following:
Table (4-3): Total population density (2005- 2023)
year * Population Population density
(Million) (Pop/ km2)
2005 70.0 70.2
2010 77.0 78.1
2015 86.8 87.1
2020 99.8 100.1
2023 104.5 104.2
* Population at the beginning of the year
Source: CAPMAS (2023) Ref No 71-01112-2023
a- Fragmentation of property and agricultural land tenure
The steady population increase, and the concomitant increase in the
cultivated and cropped areas, have been reflected in the dominance of property
and smallholdings, which led to the inefficient management of these holdings and
failure to benefit from the availability of the large production. The average
agricultural holding area in Egypt is estimated at 2.2 Feddans. Table (4-4)
indicates that the number of holdings of less than one Feddan is estimated at about
2.1 million holdings for an area of 923.6 thousand Feddans, representing 39 %

--- Page 59 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 51
and 9.5 % of the number of holdings and the cultivated area, respectively.
Meanwhile, the number of holdings having an area between 1- 5 Feddan reached
about two million holdings covering an area of 4.6 million Feddans, representing
47 % of the number of holdings and 47 % of the cultivated area. As for medium
and large holdings (7-100 Feddan), they are estimated at about 195 thousand
holdings covering an area of 3.3 million Feddan, representing about 4 % of the
total holdings, and 34 % of the total cultivated area. With regard to the enormous
holdings (more than 500 Feddan), they are located on an area of 892 thousand
Feddan, but they only represent 1 % of the total cultivated area.
Table (4-4): Number and area of holdings according to area categories
Area Categories Number Area Average holding
(Feddan) (Feddan) (Feddan)
Less than 1 2143888 923638 0,4
1- 5 2100086 4575923 2,2
7- 100 195127 3339443 17.1
More than 100 431 891782 2069.1
Total 4439532 9730786 2,19
Source: CAPMAS (2022), Ref. No. 71-01111-2022.
b- Decrease of agricultural land and cropped area per capita
In view of the population increase and the high population density on
agricultural lands, the share per capita of agricultural land and the cropped area
witnessed a continuous decline, which undermined the ability of agricultural
lands to provide food requirements and raw materials for industry. In this
context, the increase in population density on agricultural lands from 8
individuals/Feddan in 2000 to 10.6 individuals/Feddan in 2018 led to the
decrease in the per capita share of agricultural land from 0.12 Feddans in 2000 to
about 0.09 Feddans in 2021, representing a 25 % decline. Likewise, the cropped
area per capita decreased from 0.22 Feddans to 0.15 Feddans; a 32 % decline
(Table 4-5)

--- Page 60 ---
Desert Research Center
52
Table (4-5): Development of the per capita of cultivated and cropped area
Year *Population Area (1000 Feddan Per capita/Feddan Density on the
(Million) Cultivated Cropped Cultivated Cropped agriculture
land
2000 63.3 7718 13922 0.12 0.22 8.2
2005 70.6 8385 14905 0.12 0.21 8.4
2010 78.7 8741 15334 0.11 0.19 9.0
2015 89.0 9096 15637 0.10 0.18 9.8
2020 100.6 9451 16295 0.09 0.18 10.6
2021 102.1 9596 16384 0.09 0.15 10.6
* Population at the middle of the year
Source: CAPMAS (2022), Ref. No. 71-01111-2022
4-2-2 Urban sprawl on agricultural land
The accelerating population growth and the high demand for housing
and services, lead to encroachment on agricultural lands. This encroachment
is one of the most serious forms of land degradation, as it is considered a total
loss of land productivity, and a loss of the land’s ability to produce living
matter, which includes food, clothing and medicine.
In addition to public benefit deductions, encroachment on agricultural
lands takes various forms. During the last ten years, from 2011 to 2020, their
number amounted to about two million cases, with an estimated area of 90,000
Feddans. The CAPMAS (2022) reported that encroachments on agricultural
lands have been signify increasing since 2011. The encroachments jumped to
about 287 thousand cases of infringement on an area of about 12 thousand
Feddans in 2011, followed by 365 thousand cases on an area of about 15.5
thousand Feddans in 2012, 231.8 thousand cases on an area of 14.7 thousand
Feddans in 2013, and 276.4 thousand cases on an area of 12.8 thousand Feddans
in 2014. Infringement cases began to decline in 2015, reaching 194.9 thousand
cases in 2015, 176 thousand cases in 2016, 44.7 thousand cases in 2019, and
55.6 thousand cases in 2020.
In 2021, encroachments amounted to about 19.2 thousand cases in an
area of about 1126 Feddan, most of which lay in Lower and Middle Egypt,
representing 35.2 % and 32.3 % of the total area, respectively. Al Beheira
Governorate in Lower Egypt and Al Minya Governorate in Middle Egypt were
the highest governorates in terms of encroachment on agricultural lands
(Fig. 4-2 and Table 4-6).

--- Page 61 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 53
Fig. (4-2): Development of the number of encroachment cases on agricultural lands
Source: CAPMAS (2022), Ref. No. 71-22128-2021
Table (4-6): Encroachments on agricultural lands (2022)
Region Number Area
(Feddan)
Lower Egypt 6779 571
Middle Egypt 6222 266
Upper Egypt 6157 288
Desert Gov. 19 1
Total 19277 1126
Source: CAPMAS (2022), Ref. No. 71-22128-2021
4-2-3 Pollution
Agricultural lands pollution sources in Egypt include: (a) extensive use of
fertilizers and pesticides; (b) agricultural drainage; (c) sewage; and (d) sediment
pollution in the atmosphere and air pollution.
a- Extensive use of fertilizers and pesticides
The increase in agricultural intensification to meet the growing demand
for food necessitates the enormous use of fertilizers and pesticides to increase
agricultural production. These results in the accumulation of fertilizer residues
and pesticides in the soil, which increases pollution, especially by heavy
elements. Therefore, Integrated Agricultural Production Management (IAPM)
and Good Agricultural Practices (GAP) play an effective role in protecting the
environment and human health from pollution risks. Studies (Elbana et al., 2019)

--- Page 62 ---
Desert Research Center
54
indicate that about 12 thousand Ton of pesticides and more than 6.4 million
Ton of fertilizers are used annually, resulting in the accumulation and
absorption of heavy metals in plants, which adversely affect human health.
b- Agricultural drainage
The quantities of agricultural drainage in Egypt are estimated at about 12
billion cubic meters annually. Agricultural drainage is an important water
source that reduces the gap in resources and water needs, 7.2 billion cubic
meters of which are reused (CAPMAS, 2023). It is targeted to increase this
amount to about 9.4 billion cubic meters. The biggest share of agricultural
drainage water is used in reclamation areas north of the Nile Delta (El-Salam
Canal Project). A study (Elbana et al., 2019) referred to increased salinity in
the agricultural drainage water in the area extending from the south of the Delta
to its north, with a salinity estimated at about 1,000 ppm and more than 2,000
ppm, respectively. An increase in the level of heavy metals such as nickel,
cadmium, and cobalt was also recorded in the soil at rates exceeding the
permissible levels in the reclamation area in Al-Hussainiya, irrigated with El-
Salam Canal waters, polluted by agricultural drainage and the Nile water at a
rate of 1:1 (Abdel Hafez et al., 2015).
c- Sewage
Sewage quantities are estimated at about 2.5 billion cubic meters, about
1.3 billion cubic meters of which are reused for irrigation. Due to the
extreme need for additional water resources, treated wastewater is totally or
partially used in agriculture.
Some studies indicate that irrigation with sewage water that is partially
treated or mixed with agricultural and industrial drainage (Gabel Al-Asfer
area and the irrigated areas by using Gharbia drain water in Central Delta)
has resulted in increased soil pollution with heavy metals such as cadmium,
chromium, and lead. (El Alfy et al., 2017).

--- Page 63 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 55
d- Air pollution
Agricultural lands surrounding the industrial areas (Shubra El-Kheima
- Helwan … etc.) and the main road axes, as well as, areas exposed to rice
straw incineration, suffer from pollution. This is because air carries numerous
particles of iron, manganese, zinc, nickel, cadmium, copper, cobalt, and other
elements that are deposited in the surface soil, causing a decline in
agricultural productivity (Elbana et al., 2019).
4-2-4 Waterlogging and salinization
Waterlogging and salinization are major factors inducing the
deterioration of soil productivity in Egypt as a result of water resource
mismanagement, low drainage efficiency, and the dominance of the
traditional surface irrigation system, whose efficiency does not exceed 60 %.
Other causes include inefficient drainage networks and the use of highly saline
agricultural drainage water, especially in North Delta.
Accordingly, some studies estimated that the agricultural lands
affected by salinity in Egypt are about 2.3 million Feddan, representing
25% of the total cultivated area and about 60% of these lands are located in
the northern Delta, 20% in the southern Delta and Middle Egypt, and 25%
in Upper Egypt (Shadad and Hendawy, 2018).
4-2-5- Soil erosion
There are two main types of erosion, geologic erosion and accelerated
erosion. Geologic erosion or Normal Erosion or Natural Erosion is a normal
process of weathering that generally occurs at low rates in all soils as part of the
natural soil-forming processes. It is not influenced by human activity. The second
type is accelerated erosion. It is occurring when erosion process influenced by
human and its rate exceeds a certain threshold level and becomes rapid. The
accelerated erosion affects soil by wind or water or tillage which has become
vulnerable, usually because of human interference with the natural environment.
For this reason, soil erosion can be considered as a symptom of bad land use and
management. Then, accelerated erosion can be reviewed as anthropogenic
erosion. This type of erosion is caused by human activities such as overgrazing,
mismanagement (intensive plowing, up and down cultivation on sloping land,
slash the plant residue during harvesting, deforestation, and biomass burning).
Under Egypt conditions different activities have been widely carried out

--- Page 64 ---
Desert Research Center
56
accelerated soil erosion considered their types, factors affecting on it, processes,
principles, and measures of controlling it.
The country where rainfall is negligible, consequently, some regions are
subjected to water and wind soil erosion types and others are subjected to only
wind erosion.
Almost water erosion studies were conducted in the (NWCR) which
extending about 480 km along the Mediterranean Sea from 35 km west of
Alexandria to Libyan border coastline in land variations in topography and
rainfall’s divide the watersheds into five parts and 70% of rainfed agriculture lies
in this region. It received rainfall between 60 and 140 mm and occupied by barley
and grazing on slope margins and orchards in wadi-beds as the main land uses.
Most of the watersheds along the (NWCR) are subjected to water erosion
hazards.
Some indicators of water erosion have been evaluated i.e. soil erodibility,
rainfall erosivity, modeling of water erosion. These indicators indicated that
rainfall is relatively low but few events characterized by high intensity cause
excessive runoff and soil loss. Runoff occurred when individual rainfall storm
exceeds 10 mm. However consistent relation is found between the period of
effective rainfall storm and runoff yield. When the amount of rainfall increased
in effective storm, runoff increased.
The annual runoff water and soil loss due to water erosion in NWCR were
found to be related to the number of effective events during three seasons. The
results concluded that runoff values are increased by increasing clay, however
the values of soil loss are decreased by increasing clay content. Bounded plots
of known area, slope steepness, slope length and soil type were used to measure
soil loss due to water erosion in NWCR. The results showed that soil loss from
shallow soil ranged from 1.23 to 5.6 t ha−1 year−1. Some of these values are
below and others are upper the permissible limits of water erosion. The
accumulation through different years with misuse and poor management of soil
and water resources may be considered detrimental soils unless; appropriate soil
conservation measures are applied. The average annual amounts of soil loss
reached to 25.71 and 39.3 t ha−1 for slope 6 and 10%, respectively. These values
can consider high and very high category of erosion risk. Moreover, water
erosion causes losses of organic matter, silt, clay and nutrients, enrichment ratios
(ERs), were greater than one.

--- Page 65 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 57
The estimated values of soil loss using these models were verified by the
values of soil loss measured by bounded runoff plots. The contribution of soil
loss in yield of crops ranged between 72 % and 84 %.
Concerning wind erosion in Egypt, about 18 million ha of the country area
are affected by different levels of wind erosion. Wind erosion threatens the
farms and cultivated lands. Climatic and soil factors in combination with human
activities are largely responsible for prevalence of wind erosion in Egypt.
Laboratory conditions using DRC’s Wind Tunnel or field conditions intended to
find out and quantify indicators and rates of wind erosion in different agro-
ecological zones, particularly in NWCZ, WDZ and EDZ as well as to evaluate
the feasibility of different management measures. In addition, some models were
used to estimate wind erosion rate and to develop effective wind erosion control.
Climatic factor, as wind erosion indicator, was calculated for 24 sites in different
regions. the values varied between the highest climatic factor is associated with
El-Hurghada. It is clear that the climatic factor is >1 in most selected areas. This
means that about 80% of the studied areas have high erosive climatic factor.
Soil erodibility, as wind erosion indicator, was determined in different
sites on basis of the percentage of non- erodible soil fraction. The soils under
study varied in their texture, organic matter content and calcium carbonate
percentage. Soil erodibility indicator ranged from 0.00 to 560 t/ha/year.
Various wind erosion models were used for estimating soil loss and
develop appropriate measures for wind erosion control. In case of the Oases of
Western Desert the estimated wind erosion rate ranged between 10 and 105
t/ha/year. It is clear that these values exceed the tolerable limits.
DRC’s wind tunnel was used to determine the threshold wind velocity
using soil samples varied in their texture. The threshold wind velocity ranged
between 5.42 and 6.6 m s−1.
To measure wind erosion rates, big spring number eight (BSNE) traps were
used. These traps were installed in WDZ, NCZ and in land Sinai. Obtained results
showed that the annual soil loss varied from 4.5- 17.99 t/ha/year. Meanwhile the
rate of deposition by wind varied from 4.5 to 66.9 t ha−1 year−1. The enrichment
ratios (ERs) of organic matter, total nitrogen, available phosphorus, and
available potassium of bare soil reached greater than 1 as the results of wind
erosion hazards.
With respect to tillage erosion, it is the redistribution or gradual

--- Page 66 ---
Desert Research Center
58
translocation as the movement of soil or displacement downhill or down slope by
mechanical implements of tillage. Recently, in sloping cultivated soils tillage
erosion has become an important component of total soil erosion and has been
considered one of the drivers of land degradation (LD).
It can be concluded that the human activities and climatic factor are the
main drivers of soil erosion. The first one can be controlled. However, the other
cannot be controlled. Also, the major problems of soil erosion can be
summarized as follows: (1) Loss of topsoil through nutrients, organic matter and
fine particles loss; (2) Reduction of soil quality and soil moisture retention; (3)
Crop damage; (4) Reduction of soil productivity; and (5) Pollution of air and
water.
Under Egypt conditions, the problems of soil erosion were mitigated by
appropriate measures such as: (a) Appropriate soil conservation measures such as
application of organic matter, soil mulching, appropriate tillage operation
regarding perpendicular tillage across the slope or erosive wind direction and
sprinkler or drip irrigation as well as the application of conservation agriculture;
and (b) Applying integration measures of soil conservation and selecting low cost
measures such as tillage across the slope or erosive wind direction.
4-2-6 Sand dunes movement
Due to Egypt’s geographical location in arid regions, sand dune
formations are considered one of the main land forms. They cover an area of
about 262 thousand km2, representing approximately 26 % of the total area.
These areas are distributed as indicated in (Fig. 4-3 and Table 4-7).
Table (4-7): Distribution and areas of sand dunes in Egypt
Region Area (1,000 km2) Region Area (1,000 km2)
The Great Sand Sea 114.4 South Rayan 1.2
Selima plain 63.2 Southeast Qattara 28.8
South Qattara 10.4 North Delta 0.9
Abu Muharraq 6.00 Eastern Cairo 0.1
East Farafra 10.3 Um Hibal 0.8
North Sinai 13.6 East Oweinat 8.00
West Delta 4.4
Total 262.1
Source: Embabi N.S. (2000)

--- Page 67 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 59
Fig. (4-3): Distribution of sand seas and dune fields in Egypt
Source: Bubenzer, et al. (2020)
4-2-7 Sand and Dust Storms (SDS)
Sand and dust storms are considered one of the natural hazards that losses
of life and property, and damages the infrastructures. They have a significant
impact on both civilian and military operations and also cause problems to human
health, agriculture, aircraft and automobiles engines, electro-optical systems. The
SDS are the most significant natural hazards in Egypt. The frequency, intensity
and socioeconomic impact of the mentioned hazards are remarkable. In this
regard, Egypt is among the country parties that are affected by SDS as well as, it
is among the countries that are classified as SDS source area. Sources of SDS in
Egypt are distributed in the Western Desert, Sinai and Nile valley and Delta.
Figures (4-4) and (4-5) show the local and regional sources of SDS affecting
Egypt.
SDS are frequent during most of the year. However, the main dust activity
during the year is found from northwest to southeast. The maximum activity is
observed during winter and spring seasons with strong activity in March-April. It
is concluded that the maximum SDS frequency is recorded at the North West of
Egypt (Matrouh Governorate), Southeast at Aswan and North-East at Sinai. The
SDS frequency is increasing with strong southern wind associated with strong
activity in cyclone. While, Rising Sand Frequency (RSF) is increasing with active
northern and southern wind without in cyclone. The interval with increase of SDS
associated increase cyclone activity by strong southern wind. On the other hand,
Figure (4-6) shows some events of SDS from 2008 to 2012.

--- Page 68 ---
Desert Research Center
60
It is found that desert and Mediterranean depressions have maximum
frequency with 46% and 24%, respectively, while high pressure and scale system
have minimum occurrence with 10% and 6%, respectively and the Red Sea
mountains has a moderate frequency of 14%.
Fig. (4-4): Sources of SDS in Western Desert 9 (El-Gamily et al., 2010)
Fig. (4-5): Regional sources of SDS affecting Egypt (El-Gamily et al., 2010)

--- Page 69 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 61
Fig. (4-6): SDS events of 2008-2012
4-2-8 Coastal erosion
The Egyptian Coasts extend for more than 3,000 km along the
Mediterranean Sea, the Red Sea, and the Gulfs of Suez and Aqaba. More than 32
million people live on these coasts; most of them are located in the Northern Delta
between the Rosetta and Damietta Branches (275 km2). These coasts have a
unique diversity of ecosystems that include coral reefs, mangroves, sand dunes,
sea grasses, etc. The Mediterranean coast, which extends for more than 1000 km,
differs from the Red Sea coast. The Mediterranean Coast is characterized by deltaic
sediments, sand formations, lakes, depressions, mudflats, salt marshes, and rocky
beaches. As for the Red Sea Coast, it is mountainous, of limited depth, and home
to coral reefs and mangrove forests.
The Egyptian coasts, especially the northern ones, are exposed to numerous
problems, including beach erosion, deterioration of coastal depressions, intensive
use in some areas, oil pollution, and climate change- induced sea level rise (Masria
et al., 2014).

--- Page 70 ---
Desert Research Center
62
Given the geological, geomorphological, and geographical conditions of the
Red Sea Coast, the risks to which these beaches are exposed are limited to the
deterioration of plant and animal biodiversity. As for beach erosion, it does not
constitute a great danger in the long term.
With regard to the northern coast, it is divided into four sectors: first, the
northwestern coast from Salloum to the city of Hammam, the second from
Hammam to Abu Qir, the third from Abu Qir to Port Said, and the fourth from Port
Said to Rafah, the easternmost Egyptian Border. This coast is exposed to the risks
of various degrees of beach erosion (Hereher 2015), as follows (Fig.4-7):
- Beaches not exposed to erosion risks, extending in the Northwest Coast from
Salloum to Alexandria and from Arish to Rafah.
- Beaches with limited exposure to erosion risks, located in North Sinai from
west of Al Arish to west of Bardawil, with a length of 100 km, in addition to
another sector with a length of 25 km east of Alexandria.
- Beaches with medium exposure to erosion, extending for a distance of 190 km
in four regions in the northern Delta and east and west of the Suez Canal.
- Beaches highly exposed to erosion risks, located in the following places: In
the middle of the Delta, at the exits of the Rosetta and Damietta branches, East
of the Suez Canal exit, and at Al Arish Valley Exit.
Fig. (4-7): Coast erosion risks on the northern coasts
4-2-9 Climate change and drought
Egypt has a high degree of risk to natural hazards and is highly vulnerable to
climate change impacts. Egypt’s Nile Delta is recognized as one of the world’s
three ‘extreme’ vulnerability hotspots. Future projections indicate that Egypt will
suffer from sea level rise, water scarcities and deficits, as well as an increase in the
frequency and intensity of extreme weather events such as heat waves, sand and
dust storms, flash floods, rock slides and heavy rains.

--- Page 71 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 63
The country is expected to become generally hotter and drier under a
projected future climate. Egypt is already severely impacted by and susceptible to
droughts, which are expected to be more frequent and pronounced.
Additionally, sea level rise is projected to lead to the loss of a sizable
proportion of the northern part of the Nile Delta due to a combination of inundation
and erosion, with consequential loss of agricultural land, infrastructure and urban
areas. Key sectors impacted include water resources, agriculture, fisheries, health,
housing, biodiversity, telecommunications, energy, tourism, and coastal zones
(UNDP, 2018).
Egypt is considered highly vulnerable to climate change due to its primary
dependence on the Nile River, which serves needs for potable water, agriculture,
industry, fish farming, power generation, inland river navigation, mining, oil and
gas exploration, cooling of machinery and power generation. This dependence on
the Nile River’s water makes the country vulnerable to rising temperatures,
reduced rainfall for the upper Nile Basins as well as the reduction of rainfall on
the east Mediterranean coastal zone (Egyptian Environmental Affairs Agency,
2016).
Egypt submitted its Nationally-Determined Contribution (NDC) and Third
National Communication (NC3) to the UNFCCC in 2016, in support of its efforts
to realize its development and economic goals and increase its adaptive capacity
to climate change. The country is particularly vulnerable to the impacts of climate
variability and change, particularly with respect to water security, agriculture and
livestock, increasingly adverse conditions to health, human settlements, and
energy demand and supply. Egypt’s NDC is consistent with the country’s overall
goals of reducing vulnerability and poverty, and achieving long-term sustainable,
economic development. Key areas of focus include the sustainability of the
environment, water resources, energy, sustainable land management, agriculture,
and health.
Concerning the drought, Egypt is prone to drought for several reasons,
such as the lack of rainfall, which worsened because of the rise in temperatures
caused by the increase in greenhouse gases. This also helps change the path of
water precipitation. Climate change and temperature rising also lead to
evaporation of water and a decrease in the levels of lakes and rivers in Egypt.

--- Page 72 ---
Desert Research Center
64
Current (based on historical climate conditions and recent trends, generally
over the past few decades), rainfall variability within Egypt is almost
inconsequential, given that the country receives very little rainfall, as well as the
fact that its agriculture is irrigated and not rain-fed. Variability in Nile flows are
moderated by the High Aswan Dam. The dam has one year’s worth of storage
capacity, to help in handling periodic droughts, although Egypt remains
vulnerable to multiyear droughts.
Future: 2020-2049
Estimates are highly uncertain and information is not readily available.
Consider future drought conditions based on the most extreme past experience.
Future: 2040-2059
There is considerable uncertainty with regard to the projections of rainfall,
both over Egypt as well as over the principal headwaters of the Nile. There is
agreement across climate models that temperatures are projected to increase
significantly under climate change, increasing the possibility of enhanced water
losses from evapotranspiration, particularly given the arid climates of Egypt and
Sudan, which might imply reduction in stream flows and stored water.
4-2-10 Economic losses of land degradation
Historically a reduction in productivity (usually plant yield) and
subsequent economic cost was a main constituent used to define the severity of
land degradation. A more robust constituent now exists that places land
degradation into the context of issues that matter the most to humans-estimating
the monetary value associated with a persistent reduction of ecosystem goods and
services. For example, in absolute terms, the monetary value of the total global
ecosystem goods and services- the terrestrial ecosystem services value (ESV)
which includes, food, feed, water availability, timber, air and water purification,
soil formation, storage of carbon, flood mitigation and pollination-was estimated
to be 125-145 trillion US $/years while losses due to land degradation ranged
from 43 to 20.2 trillion US $/ years. The economics of land degradation initiative,
which is a global initiative that promotes an awareness of economic consequences
of land degradation, and the value of the sustainable land management, estimates
the value of ecosystem services lost due to land degradation, is equivalent to 10-
17% of the global GDP.
Monetary valuation goods and services such as those should nonetheless

--- Page 73 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 65
be considered as rough approximation. There are numerous reasons for this,
including:
a- The lack of a universally accepted pricing system.
b- The lack of cost-benefit economic analysis at local scale and in data poor
areas.
c- Many physical or environmental linkages that support or maintain
ecosystem functions are difficult to quantify and thus remain hidden.
d- Most ecosystem services are interdependent, interactive and function on
long time scales, which make their economic valuation extremely
challenging. In spite of these shortcomings, the monetary valuation of
ecosystem service has many benefits from raising awareness to
supporting decision makers who are considering the economic benefits
of sustainable land management. Economic data at the local scale has
the potential to impart insights into the cost-benefits of alternative
strategies as well as the monetary value of adopting a specific land
management practice (WAD, 2019).
In Egypt, the cost environmental degradation in 1999 is estimated at LE
10-19 billion per year or 3.2-6.4% of GDP, with a mean estimate of LE 14.5
trillion, Or 4.8% of GDP (World Bank, 2002) . In addition, the damage cost to
the global environment is estimated at 0.6 of the GDP. Estimated damage cost
has been organized by environmental categories. In this concern, the cost to
health and quality of life is about2.6% of GDP, followed by 2.2 for natural
resources as follows (Table 4-8).
Table (4-8): Annual cost of environmental degradation (mean Estimate)
component Million LE Percent of GDP
per year (%)
Air 6.400 2.1%
Soil 3.600 1.2%
Water 2.900 1.0%
Coastal zones and 1.000 0.3%
Cultural heritage
Waste 600 0.2%
Sub-Total 14.500 4.8%
Global 1.900 0.6%
environment
Total 16.400 5.4%

--- Page 74 ---
Desert Research Center
66
On the other hand, the total agriculture areas in Egypt that affected by land
degradation due to sand encroachment are estimated to be 1.8 million
acre, which represent around 20% of the total cultivated areas. Consequently the
economic losses are estimated at 25% of the average productivity (DRC 2018).
5- Land degradation hot spots

--- Page 75 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 67
Land degradation prevails over a vast portion of the terrestrial ecosystem
of Egypt. Such portion is dotted by high number of land degradation hot spots. A
hot spot is severely degraded area where land degradation indicators are observed.
Table (5-1) shows the hot spots of the various types of degradation in the different
Agro-Ecological Zones.
Table (5-1): Hot spots of land degradation types in the Agro-Ecological Zones
Agro-Ecological
Types of land degradation Location of hotspot
Zone
Sand and Dust Storms North Sinai
Soil erosion North Sinai, NWCZ
Water and soil salinization North Sinai, NWCZ,
Deterioration of rangeland NWCZ
Northern Coastal
Beach erosion North Sinai, NWCZ
Zone
Sea Level Rise North Sinai, NWCZ
The governorates of: Alex., El-Beheira, Kafr
Water and soil salinization El Sheikh, El-Dakhalyia, Damietta, Port Said
and El-Fayoum
The governorates of: Alex., El-Beheira, Kafr
Water logging El Sheikh, El-Dakhalyia, Damietta, Port Said
and El-Fayoum
Urbanization Governorates of Nile Valley and Delta
Nile Delta and
Western fringes of the Nile Valley and Delta, The
Valley
Sand encroachment governorates of: Alex., El-Beheira, Kafr El
Sheikh, El-Dakhalyia, Damietta and Port Said.
The governorates of: Alex., El-Beheira, Kafr El
Beach erosion
Sheikh, El-Dakhalyia, Damietta and Port Said.
The governorates of: Alex., El-Beheira, Kafr El
Sea Level Rise
Sheikh, El-Dakhalyia, Damietta and Port Said.
Pollution Governorates of Nile Valley and Delta
Sand and Dust Storms East Oweinat, Dakhala, Kharga, Farfra….ect.
Soil erosion East Oweinat, Dakhala, Kharga, Farfra….ect.
Water and soil Salinization Oases of the Western Desert Western Desert,
Sand and Dust Storms Middle Sinai, South eastern Desert
Middle & South Sinai, Wadis of Eastern
Soil erosion
Desert Inland Sinai and
Water and soil Salinization Middle & South Sinai the Eastern Desert
6- Responses and efforts to combat desertification and
neutralize land degradation

--- Page 76 ---
Desert Research Center
68
Restoring degraded lands and combating desertification are of a vital
important for human endeavor in the face of growing needs for food, health
and security. Yet, it remains challenging, particularly reducing pressure on
land resources because of increasing human socio- economic activities and
inadequate commitment from stakeholders to halt the process. To successfully
restore degraded land, a wide variety of approaches are required. Restoration,
reclamation and rehabilitation are essential in reserving land degradation
processes and desertification. Programs and projects designed to combat
desertification must effectively address challenges associated with the root
causes of problem connected to its socio-economic sources.
In Egypt, the notion of combating desertification includes activities
which are part of the integrated development program in view of Egypt’ vision
2030 and the national commitment to combat desertification and sustainable
use of natural resources aiming at: (I) prevention and /or reduction of land
degradation, (II) rehabilitation of partly degraded land, and (III) reclamation
of degraded land. In this context, the most important activities of relevant
ministries to combat desertification in view of Land Degradation Neutrality
(LDN) can be presented as follows:
6-1 Land Degradation Neutrality (LDN)
In view of the abovementioned commitments, Egypt in 2017 set the
necessary national goals and measures to land degradation neutrality to be
achieved by 2030 as one of the world's distinguished countries in combating
desertification at the global level. The goal of land degradation neutrality in
Egypt, according to Egypt’s Vision 2030 was to preserve productive land
resources, increase their areas, and improve their productivity, in line with the
priorities of sustainable national development which is direct aim for increasing
land productivity and sustainability to meet the raising demand for food or product
necessary for agricultural manufacture without increasing in land degradation
while preserving and developing it (DRC, 2018).
• Land Degradation Neutrality target setting, within a proposed timeline has
been identified at different levels.
- At the national scale, LDN aims to achieve no net loss by 2030 as compared
to 2015. Additionally, LDN aspires to achieve a net gain of about 10% of
the national territory.

--- Page 77 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 69
- At the sub- national scale, LDN would be achieved in the land degradation
Hotspots: Kafr El Sheikh Governorate, Damietta Gov., Rasheed area, El
Minia Gov., Sohag Gov., Al Fayoum Gov., Matrouh Gov. (Fuka – El
Sallum), El Khattara area, El Tina Plain area, El Farafra Oasis, and North
Sinai by 2030 as compared to 2015 (no net loss).
- In order to effectively combat land degradation at the country level, the
government is committed to achieve the neutrality of land degradation by
2030 with the following specific targets:
1. Restoring and increasing the productivity of 11666 sq km (2800000
Feddan) of cropland using the modern agricultural techniques included on
farm irrigation development and Sustainable Land Management (SLM)
practices in the northern areas, western and eastern fringes of reclaimed
lands of Nile Delta and El Tina Plain area by 2030;
2. Rehabilitating and increasing the productivity of 8000 km2 (1.92 million
Feddan) of rangeland and rainfed areas using SLM practices in the north
coastal areas (rangeland and rain-fed farming areas) by 2030,
3. Regarding the reclaimed areas in the western desert fringes of the middle
and upper Egypt, the government is committed to rehabilitate and increase
the productivity of 7500 km2 (1.8 million Feddan) of cropland using SLM
practices by 2030, in addition to reclamation and cultivation of 6300 sq. km
(1.5 million Feddan) of virgin land in reclaimed desert soils at different
locations in the western desert of Egypt by 2030.
4. Furthermore, great considerations have been focused on rationalizing water
consumption by growing drought-tolerant crops and adopting modern
irrigation systems for around 1000 km2 in some Oases in the Western
Desert of Egypt by 2030;
5. Halting the conversion of crop land to other different cover classes by 2030;
6. Controlling or alleviating soil erosion by runoff water, construction of
cemented dykes and development of watershed areas for water harvesting
to be utilized for agricultural activities for an area of about 2500 km2 in the
North Western Coastal Zone of Egypt by 2030;
7. Increasing the tree cover/ forest cover by 25%, through agro-forestry and
SLM in the existing forests by 2030 as compared to 2015.
In relation to the LDN policy measures, some presidential decrees
pertaining policy measures have recently been outlined through a national
campaign for the various encroachments on the arable lands to restore and

--- Page 78 ---
Desert Research Center
70
rehabilitate their productivity through putting the long standing legislations into
effect, the case meaning that actions will be taken by a high level authority
designated to enforce such measures in order to achieve LDN targets.
A UNCCD National Coordination Committee was reformulated and activated
by decree from the Minister of Agriculture and Land Reclamation to undertake well
defined tasks, namely; following up policies, programs, projects in terms of their
priority in achieving combating desertification/ LDN targets ; approving and
following up the regional and international agreements and coordinated projects
towards combating Land Degradation (LD) and their implementation at national and
sub-national levels; developing coordinated mechanisms for local and international
funding and realizing active coordination and exchange of experiences, data and
outcomes among ministries institutions at the national level.
6-2 National interventions to combat desertification, land
degradation and drought
In this context, the commitment of Egypt has under taken a number of
activities with several objectives to achieve the development goals and combating
desertification through the designated ministries, made a strenuous effort to
achieve these goals, each in its own field, as follows:
6-2-1 Ministry of Agriculture and Land Reclamation
Entities and institutions affiliated with the Ministry of Agriculture and Land
Reclamation have accomplished the following:
a- Protection from urban sprawl
As previously mentioned, the population growth and the rise in demand for
housing have had negative repercussions represented in increasing urban sprawl
on agricultural land, undermining its ability to produce food and provide job
opportunities and livelihoods in the rural sector. To curb this phenomenon, the
state has taken a number of measures, including: (a) legislative measures:
Issuance of Law No. 166 of 1983 to criminalize and toughen penalties for
encroaching on agricultural lands, and (b) removing encroachments on
productive agricultural lands.
In this regard, as previously mentioned, the total encroachments on
agricultural lands during the past ten years amounted to about two million cases
of infringement on an area of 90 thousand Feddans. Since 2011, the encroachment

--- Page 79 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 71
on agricultural lands has begun to increase. It peaked in 2012 to reach 365
thousand cases, then the numbers began to gradually decrease as of 2015 until it
reached about 55 thousand cases in 2020 (Fig. 6-1).
Fig. (6-1): Development of the number of encroachment cases on agricultural lands
Source: CAPMAS, 2022, Ref. No. 71-22128-2021
The Central Administration for Land Protection at the Ministry of
Agriculture and Land Reclamation, in cooperation with the relevant
ministries and agencies, has removed about 645.6 thousand cases,
representing 32 % of the total number of encroachments on an area of about
36.3 thousand Feddans (Fig. 6-2). These agencies continue their removal
campaigns in all governorates of the Republic.
Fig. (6-2): Development of the number of encroachment removals on agricultural lands

--- Page 80 ---
Desert Research Center
72
Source: CAPMAS, 2022, Ref. No. 71-22128-2021
b- Developing agricultural land
Executive Authority for Land Improvement Projects (EALIP) carried out
a number of processes aimed at improving the productivity of agricultural lands
through: applying some effective practices and procedures i.e. adding agricultural
gypsum to reduce soil salinity; plowing beneath the soil to improve drainage; laser
leveling to improve surface irrigation efficiency; and cleaning of waterways.
Some studies indicated that these practices and procedures have positive
repercussions on soil and productivity as follows: (1) reducing soil salinity from 19
to 60 %; (2) reducing alkalinity from 10 to 25 %; (3) cracking the solid layers
beneath the soil; (4) reducing the groundwater level; (5) increasing the
productivity per area unit from 10 to 20 %; and (6) saving about 20 % of
irrigation water.
c- Land reclamation
The government is implementing a number of massive land reclamation
projects to establish agro-industrial communities, provide new job opportunities,
alleviate pressure on land resources in the Valley and Delta, and to reduce land
degradation. Such degradation is caused by either encroachment or pollution
resulting from intensive agricultural exploitation or the overuse of fertilizers and
pesticides to increase agricultural production and meet the growing demand for
food. These mega projects include the following:
1- Egyptian new countryside project with a total area 1.5 million-Feddan. This
project aims to reduce the food gap, increase the number of Egyptian inhabited
areas and create more job and agricultural investment opportunities. It is
concentrated in Upper Egypt, the Western Desert, Sinai, and the Western Nile
Valley in El Menia Governorate based on groundwater. About 350 thousand
Feddans were reclaimed and cultivated till 2023.
2- The New Delta Project, which is established on an area of more than 2 million
Feddans, located at the new road axis of Rod el Farag / El Dhabaa, near from
Cairo, Alexandria, El Beheira Governorates and New City of El Alamain.
This project aims to accommodate the population increase in the valley and
the old delta in new communities with modern developed agriculture systems,
and to compensate the loss of agricultural old lands. The project, depending
on reuse water resources of treated agriculture drainage throughout

--- Page 81 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 73
establishment a big station for water treatment with capacity 6.5 million m3/
day, in addition to using underground water. The project already started in
2021 under supervision of the Egyptian Future Agency for Sustainable
Development (EFASD) and the reclaimed and cultivated area reached to more
than 500 thousand Feddans by the end of 2023. It is planned to complete the
infrastructure to increase the reclaimed and cultivated area to 1 million
Feddans by end of 2025 (Fig. 6-3).
3- North and Central Sinai Development Project aims to reclaim and cultivate about
450 thousand Feddans using mixed water (fresh and agriculture drainage water)
with capacity of 2 million m3/ day with another source of treated agricultural
drainage water with capacity of 5.6 million m3/ day from west Suez Canal
through El Sheikh Gaber Al-Sabah Canal (El-Salam Canal). This project started
and the reclaimed and cultivated area reached to up 185 thousand Feddans by
2023. Also, there is another area of 75 thousand Feddans east of the New Suez
Canal based on treated agriculture drainage water pumped from El Mahsama
Siphon with capacity of 1.3 million m3/ day.
d- Sand dunes fixation
Most of the development projects are located within the dune fields and
sand seas of Western Desert and North Sinai. Such projects which implemented
by different ministries and authorities include land reclamation, settlements and
new communities, industrial areas, infrastructure …. etc., are of a direct threat to
the shifting sand and sand dunes migration.
In this context, and in view of Egyptian Experience in the control of sand
encroachment and dunes migration which started at the beginning of the twentieth
century (1929), the Desert Research Center in the recent years carried out a
number of projects aiming at the control of sand movement.
Such projects were implemented on a pilot and small scale to gain more
experiences, information and economics and the efficiency of the mitigation
measures which needed for carrying out a national project for sand encroachment
control on the national development projects in the desert areas.
When discussing the recent activities that have been under taken to control
sand movement, reference can be made to the following projects:
1. Sand dunes fixation of 100 feddan in Siwa Oasis using agriculture drainage
water (DRC and Social Fund for Development “2000-2002”).

--- Page 82 ---
Desert Research Center
74
2. Protection of the connection road between Darb-Arbean and Toshka
Depression from sand encroachment (DRC and the Authority of High Dam
and Aswan Reservoir, 2003).
3. Green belt for the control of shifting sand along Toshka Canal, south of
Egypt (DRC and Faculty of Engineering, Cairo University “2000-2003”).
4. The control of shifting sand along El Salam Canal, North Sinai (DRC and
Faculty of Engineering, Cairo University “2006-2012”).
5. The control of shifting and along South Quantara Canal, Ismailia
Governorate (DRC and Faculty of Engineering, Cairo University "2004".
6. Sand encroachment control on Shahaiem Drainage Canal, Siwa Oasis
(DRC and Arab Center for the Studies of the Arid Zones and Dry Lands,
“2014-2017”).
7. Adaptation to climate change in the Nile Delta through integrated coastal
zone Management, (Ministry of Irrigation, Shore Protection Authority and
DRC, (2017-2019).
In view of the achieved results, it could be concluded that:
• The efforts regarding sand dunes stabilization are considered very limited
and are not in proportion with the severity of the problem.
• The inhabitant’s role in the efforts of dune stabilization was limited compared
to that of the governmental and international authorities and institutions. This
may be due to some technical, economic and social constrains.
• There are a lot of techniques used to control sand encroachment in the
desert areas. Such techniques are different in terms of materials, duration,
efficiency, costs and environmental effects.
• The absence of sustainable management programs for the vegetated dunes,
resulted in the deterioration of large areas of the vegetation cover. This lead
to the shifting sand and sand encroachment.
• There are insufficient reliable data and information necessary to assess the
issues related to the desertification control and sand dune stabilization.
Consequently, the following policies and plans are recommended:
• Scientific and executive institutions and authorities should work on
planning for a national program for sand encroachment control and setting
the priorities for implementation this program. Such priorities can be

--- Page 83 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 75
achieved on the basis of the physical characteristics of the aeolian deposits,
climatic conditions … etc.
• Adequate financing should be allocated with the aid of local, regional and
international institutions and authorities.
• Paying attention to the training of technical staff to enhance the skills as
regard the planning and implementation of sand dune stabilization
programs.
• Sand dunes stabilization should be included in the topics of environmental
education programs in desert areas.
• Increase the awareness of the local inhabitants concerning the hazard
effects of the sand movement and methods of sand encroachment control,
through demonstration programs in the desert areas.
• Paying attention to the experiences of some countries in the field of
inhabitant’s participation (India – China, etc.) in the field of desertification
control.
• Low cost and effective techniques, which are successfully applied in other
countries, can be introduced.
• Scientific institutions and authorities have to adopt an intensive research
program regarding the sand dunes stabilization maintenance and
management of the vegetated areas.
e- Improvement of rangelands
The efforts devoted to rangelands improvement were started in the fifties
of the last century when the Desert Research Center started a project for
restoration of about 5000 Feddan in Ras El Hekma at the North Western Coastal
Zone of Egypt. Such efforts were continued in different zones in Egypt, i.e., North
Western Zone, North Sinai and South Eastern of Egypt.
Recently in view of the National Strategy for Sustainable Development,
Egypt’ Vision 2030 aiming at increase the inhabitant's areas to reach 25% of the
total surface area of the country, DRC has cooperated with various national and
international organizations to achieve LDN target in the degraded natural
rangelands through implement some projects related to rehabilitation and
restoration the degraded areas of natural rangelands. Reference can be made to
the following:

--- Page 84 ---
Desert Research Center
76
Fig. (6-3): The New Delta Project along El Dabaa axis
• Matrouh Resources Management Project (MRMP)
The Egyptian Government represented by the Ministry of Agriculture and
land Reclamation supported economic, social and developmental of Matrouh
Governorate through (1994 - 2003) programs, as well as successive promotion

--- Page 85 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 77
and contribution to the implementation of development that was funded by
international organizations.
MRMP project is funded by the World Bank and the Egyptian Government.
It has several objectives : Some of these are implement Government's strategy for
natural resource management in the NWCZ by implanting program of sustainable
natural resources management (in order to conserve water, land vegetative
resources of the area, alleviate poverty , improve the quality of life of the local
Bedouin population to protect biodiversity and combat desertification).
The implementation of activities is based on the participatory approach
and the involvement of the target benfairies in the project interventions for
Promoting ownership by the local population. MRMP included: Water Harvesting
and Management, Extension, Adaptive Research, Women in Development,
Gender activities and extensive training.
The Sustainable Development Center for Matrouh Resources (SDCMR)
has been started in 2003 and still ongoing now for the DRC.
For importance of rangeland management and improvement, the following
activates are implemented:
1- Total of 12000 Kg of indigenous seeds were collected from multiplicities
and distributed to the members of the local communities.
2- Providing support for the establishment of 48 plastic houses for producing
the fodder shrubs and tree seedlings in the local communities.
3- Planting of 6.32 million of fodder trees and shrubs for increasing the supply
of cheap forges, to available green forage materials in the summer time and
reducing dependence on costly concentrates. They are planted using 3
different approaches as follow:
Activity/approach Subs (million) Area (Feddan) No. of
beneficiaries
Small non-fenced areas 2.90 8212 2997
Large fenced areas 3.12 6250 250
Enter planting by barley fields 0.30 6750 965
Total 6.32 21212 4212
4- Introducing new forage species, 47 feddan of spineless cactus for 80
beneficial.

--- Page 86 ---
Desert Research Center
78
5- Reseeding of 2485 Feddan of deteriorated communal rangelands by
perennial Fodder shrubs have reduced the concentration and feed expenses
by 37% on average for about 40% of the beneficiaries.
• Promoting Resilience in the Desert Environments (PRIDE) in Matrouh
Governorate
The PRIDE project is funded by IFAD and it aims at reducing poverty and
enhancing food and nutrition security through remunerative, sustainable and
resilient livelihood in climate change-affected areas by improving productive
capacities of poor rural households and assisting communities in enhancing the
productive potential of the newly reclaimed lands as well as improving nutrition
and socio economic status of women and children. This project started in 2021
and will be continue till 2026, the main technical components include a sub
component for livestock and rangelands development.
Through the participatory approach with local communities, the project
introduced two models to improve the degraded rangelands. The first one includes
the application of Hema System (protected area) on 10000 Feddans in 40 locations
(250 Feddans per each location) with beneficiary group of 25 households in each
location. Such system aims at increase the density of the natural vegetation cover.
The second model includes the application of intercropping system through
cultivation of fodder shrubs and barley. The project started the implementation in
an area of 1200 Feddans distributed in 24 sites. Different water harvesting systems
(cisterns and dykes) were established in each site. The evolution of such models
is currently ongoing.
• Healthy Ecosystems for Rangeland Development project (HERD)
The HERD project is funded by the Global Environmental Facility (GEF)
and implemented by IUCN Regional Office West Asia and UNE in cooperation
with Desert Research Center and CEDARE.
The project objectives are the promotion of rangeland rehabilitation and
sustainable development operations by providing ecosystem services and bio-
diversity protection. The project covers an area of about one million Feddan in
both Barani and Ras El Hekma districts. The project has the following four
components: (1) Provide knowledge-based technical assistance (promote the
evidence-based decision-making mechanism); (2) Knowledge management in
terms of rangeland sustainable management and dissemination on regional and

--- Page 87 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 79
international levels; (3) Up scaling application of rangeland sustainable
development best practices; and Institutional upgrade to strengthen rangeland
governance.
Under the four project components, more than 30 activities were
implemented including socio-economic studies, training courses, rangeland
restoration, supporting activities … etc.
The main achievements of the project can be presented as follows:
1- Establish the revolving fund aiming at support the pastoralists and herders
during the dry season by allowing soft in kind loans to obtain fodder and
financing micro-enterprise for women to diversify sources of income for poor
pastoralist’s families. The capital fund is 3 million Egyptian pounds which
provided by HERD project and Matrouh Governorate. At the end of 2022 about
87 beneficiaries were benefited from the fodders loans and 44 women from the
small enterprises loans, with a recovery rate ranging between 90-100%.
2- Formulation of the first Egyptian law to organize and manage the sustainable
use of the rangeland. The law includes 19 articles that include defining
responsibilities and the administrative structure necessary for development,
management and exploitation rangeland. Also the law includes the rights of the
pastoralists and controls for sustainable use of rangelands. Currently, the law is
discussed in the Ministry of Agriculture and Land Reclamation to proceed.
3- Establish of 14 demonstration rangeland plots (50 Feddan per each), in which
the Hema (conservation) rules were applied and pastures were developed.
Under project area conditions the plant cover increased from 35% to 73% due
to conservation.
4- Upgrading the skills of 15 the governmental employees as regards the modern
technologies for monitoring and evaluation through 5 training courses on GIS
and remote sensing.
6-2-2 Ministry of Water Resources and Irrigation
The Ministry carried out projects aimed at increasing the water use
efficiency in the different sectors including the agriculture lands. The most
important of which are the following:
a- Field irrigation development project
The project aims to develop field irrigation in old lands established by the
Ministry of Agriculture and Land Reclamation, in cooperation with the Ministry of
Water Resources and Irrigation. This is accomplished through improving field
irrigation systems by shifting from traditional flood irrigation to developed irrigation

--- Page 88 ---
Desert Research Center
80
(sprinkler and drip), maximizing the use of the land and water unit, and ensuring
equitable distribution of water among farmers. The development of field irrigation
contributes to reducing rural poverty, improving livelihoods by increasing and
upgrading agricultural production, as well as saving about 25 % of water uses. Field
irrigation has also led to a 20 % rise in agricultural production, in addition to
increasing water productivity from 36 to 68 %. Ministry of Agriculture data indicates
that about 285 thousand Feddans in several governorates have been converted from
traditional irrigation to drip or sprinkler irrigation at a cost of LE 2.8 billion, since
the inception of work in 2017 until the beginning of 2021.
b- Agricultural drainage projects
These projects aim at developing the national economy through the
establishment and maintenance of infrastructure projects in the field of general
and covered agricultural drainage. This keeps the groundwater level away from
plant roots to ensure the provision of adequate soil aeration, the preservation of soil
fertility, improvement of its chemical and natural properties, as well as reduction
of its salinity. This leads to a 25 % increase in agricultural production.
The authority's strategy includes establishing, deepening, and expanding open
public drains on an area of 8.5 million Feddans in Lower and Upper Egypt and
the newly reclaimed areas. About 7.2 million Feddans and 0.8 million Feddans
have been respectively developed in the reclamation areas. As for the covered
drainage, the Authority aims to implement networks on an area of 6.4 million
Feddans in Lower and Upper Egypt, and about 6 million Feddans have been already
enhanced.
c- Coastal protection projects
The coastal protection program, implemented by the Egyptian General
Authority for Coastal Protection, aims to confront climate change effects, stop
the decline of the shoreline in areas suffering from severe erosion, and restore the
beaches lost as a result of such erosion. This contributes to increase tourism
income in coastal areas.
The program also works to preserve historical monuments in coastal areas
such as Qaitbay Citadel in Alexandria, safeguard agricultural lands located
behind the protection work, and endeavor to stabilize tourist areas and acquire
new spots for tourism purposes. Furthermore, the program seeks to protect some
villages and low-lying areas from the dangers of seawater inundation, such as the
area east of Rosetta Branch estuary and until Burullus strait, as well as west of

--- Page 89 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 81
Port Said. In addition, the protection work contributes to the development of
fisheries in the northern lakes by upgrading the straits and protecting Nile River
estuaries at Damietta and Rosetta branches to face problems related to erosion
and sedimentation.
In this context, several massive projects are being implemented to protect
the city of Alexandria, Qaitbay Citadel, the ancient sea wall, the city of Ras El-
Bar, the coastal area north of Berket Ghalioun, as well as El- Obeid and Marsa
Matruh beaches in Matrouh Governorate with the other projects at a cost of
around LE 180 billion.
6-2-3 Ministry of Environment
Ministry of Environment has assigned great attention to protect the environment
and natural resources and alleviating pressures thereon. In this regard, the
General Administration of Environmental Economics is making tremendous efforts
to address encroachments on the environment and the misuse of natural resources,
and to achieve Egypt's sustainable Development Goals.
a- Green economy
The green economy is one of the essential mechanisms for achieving
sustainable development, as it may involve various opportunities such as
encouraging innovation, establishing new markets, creating job opportunities, and
contributing to poverty reduction.
The green economy is an opportunity to apply advanced technologies to
achieve food security, ensure rural areas› access to energy, and provide clean water
supplies, housing, sanitation facilities and public transportation. All this
contributes to providing job opportunities and poverty reduction. The General
Administration of Environmental Economics is following up on the concerned
authorities’ efforts to shift to a green economy in the following fields:
Energy
• Increasing new and renewable energy contribution by about 20 % of the total
consumed energy,
• Investing in electricity generation from solar energy and the economic
exploitation of the Western Desert in this regard,
• Correcting the price structure of petroleum products and restructuring the
energy sector.

--- Page 90 ---
Desert Research Center
82
Transportation
• Cooperation is established between the Ministry of Environment, the Ministry
of Finance, and Nasser Social Bank to replace Cairo Taxi to use gas fuel to
reduce carbon emissions,
• The Ministry of Environment is implementing an ambitious program to convert
government cars to run on natural gas to reduce emissions,
• Working with the Ministry of Trade to ban two- stroke motorcycles and replace
them with four- stroke ones to reduce air pollution,
• Supporting mass transit systems,
• Attracting investments in the energy sector to adapt to climate change effects.
Industry
• The Ministry of Environment implements programs for industrial pollution
control and environmental protection for the Private and Business Sectors,
• Encouraging the transition to industries that rationally consume energy, natural
resources and water,
• The tendency towards increasing industry localization in new cities,
• Expanding support for small and medium industries in the field of the
environment,
• Water reuse and control of industrial drainage.
Agriculture
• Sustainable use of natural agricultural resources,
• The use of integrated agricultural management techniques,
• Raising water use efficiency in agriculture, improving irrigation and drainage
systems, and cultivating less water-consuming varieties,
• Expanding the reuse of agricultural drainage and sewage water after treatment
Institutional measures
• Amending environmental legislation and developing environmental
management systems,
• Orientation toward green economic development less dependent on carbon,
• Completing the institutional framework for managing efforts to adapt to climate
change impacts,
• Inclusion of environmental dimension in development projects,

--- Page 91 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 83
• Adopting financial policies that encourage and support environment-friendly
establishments, and toughening penalties for environmental violations.
b- Protected areas (Natural reserves)
Since the enactment of the Law No. 102 of 1983, thirty-one areas have
been declared as protected areas in Egypt, covering more than 15% of the
country’s area.
The network of natural protected areas includes most of the habitats and
ecosystems in Egypt. There are also other important areas that will be included in
this network in the future.
Over the past decades, the United Nations Development Program (UNDP)
has worked with the Egyptian Ministry of Environment and participated in
encouraging and managing the network of protected areas and enhancing the care
and support of its local communities.
The network of natural protected areas includes biological species, distinct
natural areas, and geological formations. Local people, their cultures, and their eco-
tourism are also considered important components of protected areas.
A lot of resources and efforts have been invested in managing the natural
protected areas to achieve their desired goals. Nowadays many of these sites have
effective management plans, infrastructure and appropriate equipment operated
by a distinguished specialized team. Table (6-1) and figure (6-4) show the
distribution and the characteristic of the protected areas in Egypt.

--- Page 92 ---
Desert Research Center
84
Table (6-1): Classification and areas of natural reserves (protected
areas) in Egypt
Date of Type according to IUCN Area
No Protected Governorate
announcement classification km2
1 Ras Mohamed and 1983 South Sinai National park 778.2
Tiran & Sanafir islands
2 El Z araniq 1985 North Sinai Sources management 226
3 El A hwash 1985 North Sinai Natural Scenes 3
4 El A med 1986 Matrooh Biosphere 692
5 Olb a protected 1986 Red Sea National park 30462
6 Sal oga &Gazal Islands 1986 Aswan Habitat Management 0.4
7 Sai nt Katrine protected 1988 South Sinai Land Natural Scenes 4483
8 Ash toon El Gamil 1988 Port Said Sources management 171
9 Kar oon 1989 Fayoum Sources management 1341
10 El R ayan Valley 1989 Fayoum National park - Sources 1756
management
11 El A laqi Valley 1989 Aswan Biosphere 22779
12 El A syuti Valley 1989 Asyut Habitat Management 35
13 Ko bat El Hasana 1989 Giza Natural monument 2
14 Fos silized Forest 1989 Cairo Natural monument 3
15 Wa di Snor cave 1992 Beni Suef Natural monument 12
16 Nab aq 1992 South Sinai Sources management 519
17 Ab ou Galom 1992 South Sinai Sources management 426
18 Tab a 1998 South Sinai Natural monument 2825
19 El B orolos 1998 Kafr El Sheikh Sources management 911
20 Nil e Islands (144) 1998 Various Sources management 140
governorates
21 Wa di Degla 1999 Cairo Land Natural Scenes 37
22 Siw a Protected 2002 Matrooh Sources management 7733
23 Wh ite Desert 2002 New Valley Land Natural Scenes 3734
24 Cam els valley 2003 Red Sea Sources management 6729
25 Red Sea North Islands 2006 Red Sea National park - Natural 1710
Scenes
26 El G alf El Kabir 2007 El Wadi El National park 48525
Gadid
27 El D ababiya 2007 Luxor Natural monument 1
28 Sal oom 2010 Matrooh Habitat Management 390
29 El W ahat El Bahariya 2010 Giza Natural monument 103
30 Gab al Kamel Meteorite 2012 El Wadi El Astronomical information of 77
Gadid global scientific significance
31 Wh ales Valley 2008 Fayoum Natural Heritage Reserve 400
(UNESCO)
Source: CAPMAS, 2022, Ref. No. 71-22301-2020

--- Page 93 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 85
t
p
y
g
E
n
i
s
a
e
r
a
d
e
t
c
e
t
o
r
p
f
o
n
o
i
t
a
c
o
L
:
)
4
-
6
(
.
g
i
F
م 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7 1 8 1 9 1 0 2 1 2 2 2 3 2 4 2 5 2 6 2 7 2 8 2 9 2 0 3 1 3
المح مية ر أس مح مد نبق أبو ج الو م ط ابا س انت كاتر ين الأ ح و اش الز ر انيق أش تو ن الج ميل العميد الغابة المتح ج ر ة قبة الح س نة قار و ن و ادى الر يان كهف وادى س نور و ادى الأ س يو ط ى س الو ج ا و غ ز ال و ادى العلا قى مح ميات ع لبة البر لس ج زر نه ر النيل و ادى دج لة مح مية س يو ة الص ح راء البيض اء و ادى الج مال ج زر الش مالية للبح ر الأ ح مر الدبابية الج لف الكبير الس لو م الو اح ات البح ر ية نيزك ج بل كامل و ادى الح يتان
d e tc e to r P d e m a h o M sa R q a b a N m o laG u o b A a b a T e n irta K tn ia S h sa w h A lE q in a ra Z lE lim aG lE n o o th sA d e m A lE tse ro F d e z ilisso F a n a sa H lE ta b o K n o o ra K y e lla V n a y a R lE e v a c ro n S id a W y e lla V itu y sA lE la z aG & a g o la S y e lla V iq a lA lE d e tc e to rp a b lO so lo ro B lE sd n a lsI e liN a lg e D id a W d e tc e to rP a w iS tre se D e tih W y e lla v sle m a C h tro N a e S d e R sd n a lsI a y ib a b a D lE rib a K lE flaG lE m o o la S ayirah aB lE tah aW lE le m a K la b aG e tiro e te M y e lla V se la h W

--- Page 94 ---
Desert Research Center
86
c- Afforestation by use sewage water
In the mid of nineteen's, the national program for the "safe use of the treated
Sewage Water for Afforestation" was launched, by Ministry of Agricultural and
Land Reclamation with the supervision of the Holding Company of Water and
Waste Water and a technical support also from the Egyptian Environment Affairs
Agency (EEAA). Such program aiming at improves the prevailing conditions by:
- Making use of unutilized sewage water (4.4 BCM), which is of a hazard for
the Environment.
- Establish forests plantations to support the effort for minimizing the
concentration of the greenhouse gases in the atmosphere within the frame
work of such program some 60 man-made forests covering an area of about
11195 Feddan located in 16 governorates. Table (6-2) shows the distribution
of the forests among the different governorates.
The planted species includes: Acacia, Casuaring, Cupressus, Eucalyplus,
African Mahagany, Neem, Pinus, Popular, Jatropha…, Jojoba… etc.
Table (6-2): Relative distribution of forests areas using treated sewage water in 2019
Area
Item Relative distribution (%)
(Feddan)
Giza 4.5 500
Alexandria 0.5 60
Suez 3.5 400
Ismailia 4.5 500
Dakahlia 1.3 150
Monufia 4.5 500
Beni Suef 4.5 500
Asyout 0.3 40
Suhag 17.9 2000
Qena 4.5 500
Aswan 19.5 2185
Luoxr 15.2 1700
The New Valley 11.6 1300
South of Sinai 4.1 460
North Sinai 1.8 200
Red Sea 1.8 200
Total 100.0 11195
Source: CAPMAS, 2022, Ref. No. 71-22301-2020
6-2-4 Ministry of Housing, Utilities and Urban Communities

--- Page 95 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 87
The ministry of Housing, through its various agencies, developed and
stablished new urban communities to redistribute the population in the Nile Valley
and Delta into the desert in order to protect the agriculture land from urban sprawl.
Table (6-3) shows the new communities from 1977 till today.
Establishing new cities is one of the important axes designed to limit
encroachment on agricultural lands, as the new cities meet the escalating demand
for housing in light of the steady population increase. The country has adopted this
trend since the 1970s by building several generations of new cities as follows:
Table (6-3): Distribution of the new communities
First Generation 1977 - 1982 10th Ramadan – New Borg
El Arab – 15th of May – New
Damietta – 6th of October - -
New Salhia – Sadat
Second Generation 1982 - 2000 New Cairo – Sheikh Zayed
City – Badr – Obour – New
Beni Suef – New Minya –
New Nubariya – El Shorouk
Third Generation 2000 - 2014 New Asyut – New Tiba –
New Sohag – New Aswan –
New Qena – New Faiyum –
New Akhmim
Fourth Generation 2014 - now New Administrative Capital
– New Alamein – New
Mansoura – New Toshka –
New Farafra – East Port Said
The number of new cities is expected to reach more than 44 in 2052 to
accommodate the projected population increase.
7- Women's role in activities to combat desertification and
sustainable development

--- Page 96 ---
Desert Research Center
88
Regarding to the UNCCD strategy, women and girls are vital agents of
change in efforts to minimize, stop and reverse desertification and land
degradation. Women’s access to, ownership of, and control over the land is key
to their economic empowerment and full enjoyment of their human rights. Not
only does land ownership increase their economic security, it also increases their
decision-making power within communities and families. When women and girls
have equal land ownership and tenure rights, they tend to invest in soil
conservation and sustainable land management practices. Accordingly, women
are critical to reversing desertification and land degradation, as they restore,
protect, nourish and care for the land while simultaneously caring for their
families and communities. Therefore, gender transformative actions are required
to address unequal power structures, gender gaps and human rights violations,
including: “socio-economic inequality and the persistence of poverty; inequitable
control of and access to natural resources (including land); lack of or limited
access to markets, capital, training, technical assistance, financial services and
technologies; patriarchal, discriminatory and violent cultural patterns; the sexual
division of labor and the unfair social organization of care; and the concentration
of power and hierarchical relations that prevail in the public domain, where
institutional decision-making structures in the field of sustainable development
demonstrate women’s limited access to the exercise of power and decision-
making processes. Gender transformative actions are steps capable of changing
the norms and systems that perpetuate gender inequality, and addressing the root
causes of gender-based discrimination.
One of the core principles of the UNCCD is that the participation of women
in environmental decision-making is critical to addressing desertification and land
degradation. Empowering women and girls as landowners, increasing their
participation in decisions about the land, and increasing their access to education
training and financial resources are essential actions for accelerating land
restoration and making progress towards Land Degradation Neutrality (LDN).
In 2018, the CCD published a Gender Action Plan, which mandates gender
mainstreaming to advance state efforts in achieving their land degradation
neutrality targets. The Gender Action Plan identifies critical areas for women’s
engagement in LDN programs, including i) increasing participation in the design
and implementation of programs; ii) integrating women’s economic
empowerment in implementation activities; iii) strengthening women’s land

--- Page 97 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 89
rights and access to resources; and iv) enhancing capacity-building, education and
public awareness.
The 15th session of the UNCCD Conference of Parties (COP 15), which
occurred in Abidjan 2022, approved a road map to accelerate implementation of the
Gender Action Plan through gender-responsive and transformative approaches.
In 2023, under the theme “Her Land, Her Rights”, the World Day to
Combat Desertification and Drought highlights women’s land rights as a key
element of achieving both LDN and gender equality. Objectives include raising
awareness about the gendered impacts of desertification, land degradation and
drought on women and girls, highlighting women’s contributions to sustainable
land management, and mobilizing support to advance land rights for women and
girls around the world. The key takeaway of the 2023 theme is that “investing in
women’s equal access to land and associated assets is a direct investment in their
future and the future of humanity”.
As with empowering women and girls through stronger land rights,
safeguards their human rights and empowers them to protect healthy land and
restore degraded land. When these groups own or manage land, they enjoy
increased decision-making power and can engage in participatory land
management planning. This enables the integration of women and girl's
knowledge with modern science and helps to provide these communities with
access to social services and economic opportunities. Integrating women and girl's
knowledge and participation in land management is imperative for stopping
desertification and land degradation, restoring damaged ecosystems, and
respecting, protecting and fulfilling the human rights of these groups. Studies
show that when Indigenous and community knowledge - including from women
and girls - is incorporated in decision-making, this is an effective way of restoring
land and enhancing the quality of life of these groups (Boyd, 2023).
7-1 The current state of women in the agriculture sector
The role and status of women in the agriculture sector indicated the
followings (Balbaa and Mansour, 2023):
- Egypt’s agriculture sector is a cornerstone of the country’s economy,
contributing significantly to employment and food security.
- Agricultural extension services are one of the most common and effective
programs for providing farmers (men and women) with information about

--- Page 98 ---
Desert Research Center
90
useful new practices and technological techniques. They play a crucial role
in disseminating knowledge, providing technical assistance, and facilitating
the adoption of modern agricultural practices. Extension services enable
farmers to enhance productivity, increase their yields, improve their
livelihoods, and adapt to the repercussions of climate change. Such services
are especially vital for small-scale farmers in low- and middle-income
countries.
- These programs can be operated through top-down or bottom-up
approaches. Top-down approaches typically involve training and visits,
whereas bottom-up approaches encourage the establishment of agricultural
field schools or peer farmer learning. However, extension services in Egypt
predominantly target male farmers, and not neglect the particular needs and
circumstances of women farmers.
- Empowering women farmers is a vital step toward achieving sustainable
agricultural development. It is imperative to enhance agricultural extension
services and implement policies that support women farmers, enabling them to
contribute fully to food security, poverty reduction, and economic growth.
7-2 Contribution of women in the agriculture sector
A major contributor to female employment in Egypt is as the followings:
- The agricultural sector employs around 45% of Egyptian Women in the
labor force. Informality is prevalent in the agricultural sector, with up to
94% of agricultural worker's is dependent on informal employment. While
women work in both the formal and informal agricultural sector, they are
concentrated in the latter. About 28% of the labor force is formally
employed in agriculture, only 20% of them are women. Put another way,
5.6% of women in the work force are formally employed in the agriculture
sector, compared to 22.4% of men.
- Women work in various agricultural sub-sectors such as crops, livestock,
and fisheries, and they are extensively involved in labor-intensive
activities, including harvesting, manual pest control, and weeding. About
94% of the harvesting in Upper Egypt is done by women and 67% in Lower
Egypt. In Upper Egypt, common crops such as wheat, sugarcane, and
forage crops generally require hand harvesting, particularly in cultivated
small areas. This process can be complex and requires labor-intensive and
more contribution of women.

--- Page 99 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 91
- Women in rural areas have limited access to information and technological
practices offered by agricultural extension services’ centers. Furthermore,
these services are primarily focused on crops like maize, cotton, wheat, and
rice, while vegetable and fruit crops, which claim the majority of female
labor, receive limited services.
7-3 Supportive policy practices
Agricultural extension services act as a bridge between farmers, research
institutions, and policymakers, but these services often fail to adequately reach
and cater to women farmers’ needs and circumstances. Inclusive, comprehensive
policy practices should thus be considered to foster an enabling environment for
female farmers.
7-4 Gender responsive approach
Agricultural extension programs should adopt a gender-responsive
approach that targets women farmers, recognizing their specific needs, roles, and
challenges. They can incorporate capacity-building programs that specifically
address women’s disadvantaged circumstances. Training programs should be
designed to enhance women farmers’ skills and knowledge, enabling them to
adopt sustainable agricultural practices, improve productivity, and diversify their
income. Moreover, entrepreneurial training is crucial for empowering women to
actively participate in various activities.
7-5 Access to information and technology
Promoting the adoption of technology can enhance women farmers’
efficiency, leading to increasing yields. Women farmers should have access to up-
to-date agricultural information and modern farming practices. This can be
achieved through mobile applications and online platforms for young farmers that
provide relevant and easily accessible resources.
7-6 Achievements of women empowerment, related to desertification
Within the framework of the SDGs 2030, Egypt launched the National
Strategy for the Empowerment of Egyptian Women 2030, in an effort to achieve
economic empowerment for women by developing women’s capabilities to
expand their work options, increase their participation in the labor force and
achieve equal opportunities in employing women in all sectors, including the
private sector, entrepreneurship and holding key positions in public bodies and

--- Page 100 ---
Desert Research Center
92
companies. This is done by creating opportunities for greater social participation
for women. The economic empowerment of women is one of the most important
Egyptian National Priorities, in accordance with what was stated in the Egyptian
Constitution of 2014, which emphasized the principle of non-discrimination and
gender equality in obtaining opportunities in all fields.
Under this axis, many achievements have been achieved, including: Egypt
is the second country in the world to launch the Gender Equality Seal Award, and
the Small, Medium and Micro Enterprise Development Agency won it as the first
entity to obtain the seal in Egypt and the Arab Region. The Central Bank of Egypt
signed an unprecedented memorandum of understanding globally with the National
Council for Women, and the country launched the catalyst for bridging the gender
gap with the World Economic Forum is a platform for cooperation between the
government and private sector to support women’s empowerment.
The financial savings program was launched under the title “The Model
of Savings and Loans Groups in Villages” and more than 18,000 women benefited
from it. Awareness campaigns were launched for Egyptian Women in all
governorates of Egypt about financial and banking products and a media
campaign dedicated to financial inclusion and increasing financial knowledge and
culture to change the misguided societal culture. The project “Empowering
Women and Promoting Financial and Economic Inclusion in Rural Egypt” was
launched: (I) response to Covid-19. It aims to develop a digital model for saving
and lending and enhance women’s economic empowerment and entrepreneurship;
(II) the unemployment rate among women also decreased to 21.7%, the
percentage of women holding bank accounts increased threefold, those who own
private companies and those who invest in the stock market increased to thirty
percent, and women benefited from project loans; and (III) the rate of women's
participation in the labour force reached 18%, and the rate of women's default on
loan repayments was less than 1%.
Improving the Egyptian Countryside was a dream, but it has become a
tangible reality through the “Decent Life Program,” which is the largest and most
important presidential initiative to develop the Egyptian countryside, as it aims to
change the lives of more than 58 million citizens included women, create a
comprehensive boom in infrastructure and basic services, and improve the quality
of citizens’ economic, social, and cultural lives. In addition to, bring about a
positive change in the standard of living, and create a new reality of

--- Page 101 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 93
comprehensive sustainable development for these local rural communities. The
economic role of rural women has increased by supporting the empowerment of
women in making productive decisions in agriculture. They have also played a
major role in planning and scheduling family consumption, as rural women have
the ability to create and sustain life.
During the past ten years, the Egyptian state has been able to increase
communication with women in local Bedouin communities in the desert areas, to
provide technical and in-kind support, and encourage Bedouin women to
participate in agricultural activities and apply the good agricultural practices.
Large groups of women have benefited from extension programs and the
distribution of seedlings of fruitful horticultural crops and good seeds for
vegetable crops and medicinal and aromatic plants. Also, implementing many
training courses for Bedouin women was achieved in many desert areas.
Introducing veterinary convoys to desert communities to provide veterinary
service for animals and birds that women raise as income-generating activities,
which contributed to increasing the income of Bedouin families.
In this context, DRC which is affiliated with MALR has implemented
various programs to raise the standard of living for Bedouin female breadwinners
in the desert environments affected by climate change, desertification, and
drought, such as NWCZ; Oases of Siwa; Al-Jara; Dakhla; Al-Kharga; Southern
Red Sea region; and Sinai. Where, applied training courses were implemented for
women on handicrafts; agricultural processing; and poultry production, benefiting
4,000 women annually. Implementing farm and non-farm income-generating
activities for the benefit of women and applying participatory methodology in
desert communities. The number of projects for women reaches 800 projects
annually. Also, DRC achieve 450 training and skills-raising workshops for 20,000
women target groups that aim to encourage women working in the field of
agricultural investment and the private sector. Women and men were also
involved in implementing 5,000 model demonstration fields of annual crops such
as wheat, quinoa, maize, vegetables, and medicinal and aromatic plants, in
addition to home gardens for women in the desert communities. Also supporting
women’s capabilities and raising skills in the field of preserving the natural
vegetation cover in the desert environments, and raising awareness for prevent the

--- Page 102 ---
Desert Research Center
94
collect firewood process in natural rangeland to reduce desertification and land
degradation of rangeland areas.
8- Policy and legislative to address desertification, land
degradation and drought

--- Page 103 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 95
Relevant legislations have been reviewed in order to address underlying
factors and crucial issues relevant to combating land degradation and mitigating
the effects of drought to the Egyptians. These legislations include the following
and brief discussion on the content of related legislations as indicated in:
• The Egyptian law of punishment No. 58 (1973), Articles Nos.:
162,367,372,378 and 379.
• The Agricultural Law No. 53 (1966), Articles Nos.: 151, 152, 154, 155 and 156.
• The Law No: 124 (1983) concerning fishing, marine, animals and organizing
the fish farms, Articles Nos.: 14, 15, and 52.
• The Law No: 4 (1994) and its modification by Law No. 9 (2009) promulgating
the environmental Law and its executive regulations, Articles Nos.: 27, 28 and
89.
• The Egyptian Code of Using Treated Sewage Water in Agriculture (2005).
• The Egyptian Law No. 102 for protected Areas (1983).
• The Egyptian Clean Development Mechanism (2005), Articles Nos.: 42 and 45.
• The Supreme Council for the Nile River and Waterways Protection, Article No:
47.
• Decision of Ministers of Housing, Utilities No. 44 (2000) on the exchange of
liquid wastes.
• Decision of the Prime Minister and Minister of Agriculture and Land
Reclamation No. 602 (2002) on restricting the use of wastewater in the
agriculture sector.
• Prime Minister's Decree No. 2603 (1996) for the creation of buildings or doing
business in the green areas.
• Regulations of the Law No. 4 (1994) for the environmental impact assessment,
Articles No: 19 and 20 and Decree No. 1741 (2005).
• Protection laws for the farmland expanse of infringement and desertification
are: Law No. 59 (1978); Law No. 116 (1983); and Law No. 2 (1985).
• Establishment of the Egyptian Desert Gene Bank (1995).
• Egypt joined to the International Union for the Protection of New Varieties of
Plants (UPOV) in 2019.
9- Challenges and constraints
9-1 Financial issues

--- Page 104 ---
Desert Research Center
96
- Limited financial resources to implement long term multi-sectorial NAP
Programs.
- Lack of mechanisms to secure funds from national, regional and
international sources.
- Inadequate financial allocations from national budgets in support of
UNCCD implementation as well as insignificant International financial
assistance and technical cooperation.
- Lack of financial support for participation in UNCCD regional and
international meetings.
9-2 Technical issues
- Lack of national monitoring programs to track land use changes, trends of
land degradation and conditions of affected areas.
- Lack of coordination among the three Rio Conventions (Desertification
Biological Diversity and Climate Change)
- Lack of Land Degradation Decision Support Information System (Geo-
environmental data base)
- Lack of communication strategy to raise awareness for DLDD issues.
- Inadequate levels of capacity building and public awareness to effectively
implement the UNCCD.
- Lack of clarification regarding land tenure and land use systems
- limited technical and financial capacities to implement technical measures
stipulated in the NAP.
- Low mainstreaming of DLDD into national development plans.
- Inadequate data collection to establish the requisite baseline information
and data to facilitate LDN planning and implementation.
9-3 Logistic issues
- Insufficient coordination among some regional and international agencies
responsible for the implementation of UNCCD initiatives.
- Inadequate participation and involvement of Private Sector and Civil
Society.
- Insufficient national awareness and understanding of the importance of NAP
to sustainable development of the country.
10- Ongoing and proposed projects
This section deals with the ongoing and proposed projects according to the
UNCCD Strategic Framework (2018-2030) objectives:

--- Page 105 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 97
Objective 1: To improve the conditions of affected ecosystems, combat
desertification/ land degradation, promote sustainable land
management and contribute to land degradation neutrality.
Objective 2: To improve the living conditions of affected populations.
Objective 3: To mitigate, adapt to, and manage the effects of drought in order to
enhance resilience of vulnerable populations and ecosystems.
Objective 4: To generate global environmental benefits through effective
implementation of the United Nations Convention to Combat
Desertification.
10-1 Ongoing projects
Table (10-1): List of ongoing projects
Serial Title Stake holder/partner
1 Egyptian Mega projects for land reclamation (5 MALR; MWRI; Egyptian
Million Feddan) in different locations (Western Countryside; Egypt’s Future for
Delta, Western Desert, Tushka, Sinai, …..etc.). sustainable development
authority.
2 Field irrigation development project MALR and MWRI
3 Agricultural drainage project MWRI
4 Establishment and management of protected areas EEAA
5 Afforestation projects EEAA, MALR and MHUC
6 Rehabilitating and restoration of 8000 Km2 (1.92 MALR
Million Feddan) of rangeland and rainfed areas
using SLM practices in the north coastal areas by
2030.
7 Rehabilitate and land improvement to increase the MALR
productivity of 7500 Km2 (1.8 Million Feddan) of
cropland areas using SLM practices by 2030.
8 Program of crop land conservation in the Nile MALR
Valley and Delta.
9 Capacity Building for the Desalination Research MALR
Center of Excellence, DRC
10 The coastal protection program, MWRI
11 Water harvesting program MALR and MWRI

--- Page 106 ---
Desert Research Center
98
10-2 Proposed projects (2024 -2030)
10-2-1 Proposed projects of strategic objective 1
Table (10-2): List of proposed projects of strategic objective 1
Budget
Concerned
Serial Title Duration Million
area
USD
Monitoring, Assessment,
and mapping 2024-
1 Egypt 7
Desertification / land 2030
degradation
Develop a Land
Degradation Decision
2 Support Information Egypt 2024 1.5
System (Geo-environmental
data base)
Ecosystem based Western Desert, North
2025-
3 approaches for minimizing Sinai, West Nile Valley 9
2030
the risk of SDS (Beni Suef-Asiut)
Using ground observations North Sinai, Nile delta and
and Remote Sensing for Nile Valley, Western and
2024-
4 soil salinity/water logging eastern Mediterranean 8
2025
monitoring, mapping and Coastal Zones ,Western
assessment Desert Oases
Nile Delta & Valley ,
Ecosystem based
Western and Eastern
approaches to reverse soil 2025-
5 Mediterranean Coastal 12
salinization problem in the 2027
zones, north Sinai &
agricultural land
Western Desert Oases
Northern parts of the
Western Desert (Qattara -
Nature based approaches to Siwa), north delta, north 2026-
6 10
restore degraded wetlands and west Sinai and Gulfs 2028
of Aqaba & Suez and the
Red Sea coastal Zone
Strengthen capacity-building Sinai, Western and Eastern
and public awareness for the Mediterranean Coastal 2024-
7 2.5
practices of Land degradation Zones,Western Desert 2025
Neutrality (LDN) Oases & Eastern Desert
Review Egyptian
legislations related to land
2024-
8 degradation, drought and Egypt 0.8
2025
Sustainable Land
Management (SLM)
Ecosystem based Western and eastern
2026-
9 approaches for restoring Mediterranean Coastal 4.5
2027
and developing rangeland Zones, south east of Egypt
2026-
10 developing a land use map Egypt 3
2027
Siwa and Bahriyah Oases,
Kharga-Dakhla-Farafra,
Groundwater Management
Western Mediterranean 2027-
11 and improvement of 10
Coastal Zone, Eastern 2029
irrigation techniques
Mediterranean Coastal
Zone

--- Page 107 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 99
Stabilization of active sand 2028-
12 Western desert Oases 2.5
dunes 2030
2026-
13 Soil erosion management Mersa Alam, Red Sea 1.8
2027
10-2-2 Proposed projects of the strategic objective 2
Table (10-3): List of proposed projects of strategic objective 2
Serial Title Concerned Duration Budget
area Million
USD
1 Socio-economic North eastern coastal Zone, 2025- 12
development of local North western coastal Zone, 2030
communities through South Sinai and Red Sea
rainwater harvesting, coast
2 Ecosystem based North eastern coastal Zone, 2027- 12
approaches for restoring North western coastal Zone, 2030
and developing South Sinai and Red Sea
rangeland. coast
3 Producing of tolerant seeds North Sinai, West and East 2027- 3.5
for drought and salinity. Nile delta desert fringes. 2030
4 Enhancement of living North and West Sinai. 2026- 8.5
conditions of local 2029
communities through
innovative saline
agricultural systems.
5 Improving animal health, Matruh-Sidi Barrani 2026- 1.8
animal nutrition and 2030
breeding improvement.
10-2-3 Projects of the strategic objective 3
Table (10-4): List of proposed projects of strategic objective 3
Serial Title Concerned Duration Budget
area Million USD
1 Fostering partnership for the Egypt 2024-2027 4.5
establishment of drought
monitor equipped with early
warning system
2 Enhancing capacity building for Western Desert 2025-2026 2.7
drought resilience and adaptation Oases.
3 Promoting storm water and Arish-Rafah Strip. 2025-2026 6.4
rainwater capture
4 Assessing the impact of drought North western 2025-2027 1.6
on water quality and availability Coastal zone.
5 Nature based approaches to Western and 2025-2030 8
adapt for drought & climate eastern
change Mediterranean
Coastal Zones

--- Page 108 ---
Desert Research Center
100
6 Drought monitoring and risk Mediterranean 2024-2030 4
assessment, Coastal Zone
(Sallum – Rafah)
7 Promoting water reuse and the North Sinai 2025-2028 3.5
expansion and development of
non-traditional water supplies
8 Bio-desalination of brackish Wadi El Natrun- 2025-2030 5.7
groundwater of Moghra Qattara
Formation Aquifer Depression
9 Road side green belts along new North Sinai & 2024-2030 25
establishment roads. North Western
Coast, west and
east Nile Valley
10 Groundwater development and Farafra-Dakhla- 2024-2030 6.8
management Kharga Triangle,
Western Desert
Egypt
11 Improving rainwater infiltration Mediterranean 2024-2030 4
and minimizing surface runoff Coastal Zone
through innovative soil (Sallum – Rafah
conservation and protection Strip)
techniques
12 Establishment of drought North Sinai 2024-2030 1.5
contingency plan
13 Policies and actions to diversify Western Desert 2025-2030 12
and modernize agriculture, Oases
14 Integrating new varieties of Egypt 2025-2030 12
drought tolerant wheat, maize
and rice into productive systems
15 Capacity building public for Egypt 2025-2030 2.5
water and soil conservation
techniques.
16 Development of Atlas of Egypt 2025-2030 8
Drought
17 Enhancing the drought Egypt 2024-2030 8
resilience through investments
in early warning systems, water
harvesting and shelterbelts and
windbreaks
18 Capacity building for smart Nile Delta and 2024-2025 2.5
water management and fringes
development

--- Page 109 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 101

--- Page 110 ---
Desert Research Center
102
10-2-4 Proposed projects of the strategic objective 4
Table (10-5): List of proposed projects of strategic objective 4
Serial Title Concerned Duration Budget
area Million USD
1 Nature based approaches for Red Sea & Gulfs of 2024- 12
restoring and developing Suez & Aqaba 2028
mangroves forests.
2 Innovative Saline Cultivation North Sinai, North 2025-2030 3.6
Techniques Western Coast,
North Delta, El-
Fayoum and Oases
of Western Desert
3 Assessment of the impacts of Egypt 2025-2030 10
drought on agriculture,
Livestock and water Supplies
4 Enhance crop productivity Egypt 2024-2030 9
through combinations of crop
diversification, soil fertility
enhancement and water
management
5 Land based approaches to Egypt 2025-2030 12
increase food security and
contributing the climate
change mitigation

--- Page 111 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 103
11- Outcomes of the Egypt’s NAP
Key Outcomes of the Egypt’s NAP include:
A. UNCCD 2018−2030 Strategic objectives achieved.
B. Action plan for mitigating sources of sand and dust storms achieved.
C. Land Degradation Neutrality target setting, achieved
D. Drought Initiative of the UNCCD achieved
E. Supportive Outcomes.
A. UNCCD 2018−2030 Strategic objective
The NAP contains five strategic objectives that are meant to guide the actions
of all UNCCD stakeholders and partners in the period 2024-2030:
Strategic Objectives Global Indicators Expected outcomes
Strategic objective 1: To 1.1. SO 1-1 – Trends in land 1.1 Land productivity and related
improve the conditions of cover. ecosystems services are maintained or
affected ecosystems, combat enhanced;
1.2. SO 1-2 – Trends in land
desertification/ land
productivity. 1.2 The vulnerability of affected ecosystem
degradation, promote
is reduced and the resilience of
sustainable land management 1.3. SO 1-3 – Trends in carbon
ecosystem is increased.
and contribute to land stocks above and below
degradation neutrality. ground 1.3 The measures are identified and
implemented, and necessary
1.4. SO 1-4 – Proportion of
monitoring systems are established.
land that is degraded over
total land area 1.4 Measures for sustainable land
(Sustainable management and the combating of
Development Goal desertification / land degradation are
indicator 15.3.1) shared, promoted and implemented.
Strategic objective 2: To 2.1. SO 2-1 – Trends in 2.1 Food security and adequate access to
improve the living conditions population living below water for people in affected areas is
of affected populations the relative poverty line improved.
and/or income inequality
2.2 The livelihoods of people in affected
in affected areas.
areas are improved and diversified.
2.2. SO 2-2 – Trends in access
2.3 Local people, especially women and
to safe drinking water in
youth, are empowered and participate
affected areas.
in decision-making processes in
2.3. SO 2-3 – Trends in combating DLDD.
Population Exposure to
2.4 Migration forced by desertification and
Land Degradation
land degradation is substantially
Disaggregated by Sex
reduced.

--- Page 112 ---
Desert Research Center
104
Strategic objective 3: To 3.1. SO 3-1 – Trends in the 3.1 Ecosystems’ vulnerability to drought is
mitigate, adapt to, and manage proportion of land under reduced, including through
the effects of drought in order drought over the total sustainable land and water
to enhance resilience of land area management practices.
vulnerable populations and
3.2. SO 3-2 – Trends in the 3.2 Communities’ resilience to drought is
ecosystems.
proportion of the total increased.
population exposed to
drought
3.3. SO 3-3 – Trends in the
degree of drought
vulnerability
Strategic objective 4: To 4.1. SO 4-1 – Trends in carbon 4.1 Sustainable land management and
generate global environmental stocks above and below the combating of
benefits through effective ground.
desertification/land degradation
implementation of the United
4.2. SO 4-2 – Trends in contribute to the conservation
Nations Convention to Combat
abundance and and sustainable use of
Desertification
distribution of selected
biodiversity and addressing
species.
climate change.
4.3. SO 4-3 Trends in protected
4.2 Synergies with other multilateral
area coverage of
environmental agreements and
important biodiversity
areas processes are enhanced.
Strategic objective 5: To 5.1. SO 5-1 – Bilateral and 5.1 Adequate and timely public and
mobilize substantial and multilateral public
private financial resources are
additional financial and non- resources.
further mobilized and made
financial resources to support
5.2. SO5-2 – Domestic public
available to hotspots in Egypt.
the implementation of the
resources.
Convention by building
5.2 Governmental support is provided for
effective partnerships at global 5.3. SO5-3 – International and
implementing effective and targeted
and national level domestic private
capacity-building and “on-the-
resources.
ground interventions” in the affected
5.4. SO5-4 – Technology areas.
transfer.
5.3 Extensive efforts are implemented to
5.5. SO5-5 – Future support for promote technology transfer
activities related to the
implementation of the
Convention
B. Action plan for mitigating sources of sand and dust storms
- By 2025 identification and testing mitigation practices and integrate them
into national strategies. Mitigation practices include (but not limited to):
planting Acacia saligna and other plants, mulching using eco-friendly

--- Page 113 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 105
materials such as Ecomat (100% natural oil palm residues), checkerboard
systems in addition to afforestation, (mainly Green belts).
- By 2030 the active sources of sand and dust storms in North Sinai and parts
of Western Desert including south Qattara, Kharga-Dakhla strip and
peripheries of Lake Nasser are mitigated.
C. Land Degradation Neutrality target setting
- At the national scale, LDN aims to achieve no net loss by 2030 as
compared to 2015. Additionally, LDN aspires to achieve a net gain of
about 10% of the national territory.
- At the sub- national scale, LDN would be achieved in the land degradation
Hotspots: Kafr El Sheikh Governorate, Damietta Gov., Rasheed area, El
Minia Gov., Sohag Gov., Al Fayoum Gov., Matrouh Gov. (Fuka – El
Sallum), El Khattara area, El Tina Plain area, El Farafra Oasis, and North
Sinai by 2030 as compared to 2015 (no net loss).
LDN planned to be achieved in the land degradation Hotspots: Kafr El
Sheikh Governorate, Damietta Gov., Rasheed area, El Minia Gov., Sohag
Gov., Al Fayoum Gov., Matrouh Gov. (Fuka – El Sallum), El Khattara area,
El Tina Plain area, El Farafra Oasis and North Sinai in Egypt by 2030 as
compared to 2015 and an additional 10% of the degraded Hotspot areas has
improved (net gain).
- In order to effectively combat land degradation at the country level, the
government is committed to achieve the neutrality of land degradation by
2030 with the following specific targets:
Restoring and increasing the productivity of 11666 sq km (2800000
Feddan) of cropland using the modern agricultural techniques included on
farm irrigation development and Sustainable Land Management (SLM)
practices in the northern areas, western and eastern fringes of reclaimed
lands of Nile Delta and El Tina Plain area by 2030;
- Rehabilitating and increasing the productivity of 8000 sq km (1920000
Feddan) of rangeland and rainfed areas using SLM practices in the north
coastal areas (Range lands and Rain-fed farming areas) by 2030,
- Regarding the reclaimed areas in the western desert fringes of the middle
and upper Egypt the government is committed to rehabilitate and increase
the productivity of 7500 sq km (1800000 Feddan) of cropland using SLM
practices by 2030, in addition to reclamation and cultivation of 6300 sq. km

--- Page 114 ---
Desert Research Center
106
(1.5 million Feddan) of virgin land in reclaimed desert soils at different
locations in the western desert of Egypt by 2030.
- Furthermore, great considerations have been focused on rationalizing water
consumption by growing drought-tolerant crops and adopting modern
irrigation systems for around 1000 square km in some oases in the western
desert of Egypt by 2030;
- Halting the conversion of crop land to other different cover classes by 2030;
- Controlling or alleviating soil erosion by runoff rainfall water, construction
of cemented dykes and development of watershed areas for water
harvesting to be utilized for agricultural activities for an area of about 2500
sq. km in the north western coastal zone of Egypt by 2030;
- Increasing the tree cover/ forest cover by 25%, through agro-forestry and
SLM in the existing forests by 2030 as compared to 2015.
In relation to the LDN-related policy measures, some presidential decrees
pertaining policy measures have recently been outlined through a national
campaign to the various encroachments on the arable lands to restore and
rehabilitate its productivity through putting the long standing legislations into
effect, the case meaning that actions will be taken by a high level authority
designated to enforce such measures in order to achieve LDN targets.
D. Drought initiative of the UNCCD
“To mitigate the effects of drought” is one of two overall objectives of the
UNCCD as stated in Article 2 of the Convention text and therefore is an essential
dimension of the Convention.
The text of the Convention interprets this objective as activities related to
the prediction of drought while intended to reduce the vulnerability of society and
natural systems to drought. The drought initiative will assist countries in
developing national drought policies to mitigate drought risk. The initiative is
based on three pillars: (i) monitoring and early warning systems, (ii)
vulnerability/impact assessment, and (iii) practical risk mitigation measures. This
will also entail an understanding of where and when drought will happen, who
and what is vulnerable and why. It will further call for information on the
frequency and severity of drought to identify vulnerable groups and geographic
regions, and facilitate timely development and implementation of drought impact
mitigation actions. Egypt is amongst of the countries that will be piloting this

--- Page 115 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 107
initiative.The following projects will be implemented under the umbrella of
UNCCD during 2024-2030.
E. Supportive Outcomes
- Atlas of Desertification in Egypt.
- Land Degradation Decision Support Information System (Geo-
environmental data base)
- Drought Contingency plan
12- Funding mechanisms for the implementation of Egypt’s
NAP
In terms of Article 20 of the UNCCD, parties to the convention are required
to mobilize financial resources for the implementation of the NAP. In recognizing
the central importance of financing so as to achieve the objectives of the
convention, country parties (taking into account their capabilities) are required to
make every effort to ensure that adequate financial resources are available for
programmers to combat desertification and to mitigate the effects of drought. The
NAP will be funded largely through the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework
(MTEF) and other donor-funded programmers and projects such as the Green
Fund, Climate Change Adaptation Fund, Global Environment Facility, UNCCD’s
Global Mechanism and the LDN Fund, amongst others.

--- Page 116 ---
Desert Research Center
108
13- Monitoring and evaluation of the Egypt’s NAP
Reporting on the NAP and the state of desertification is an international
obligation for Egypt, as a signatory to the UNCCD since 1994. Consequently,
progress towards achieving the strategic objectives of the NAP will be
periodically monitored and evaluated.
Sound monitoring and evaluation are of critical importance for the
successful implementation of the Egypt’s NAP. Monitoring and evaluation track
progress in the implementation of NAP and ensure that the NAP is on track in
terms of realizing its strategic objectives. In addition, monitoring and evaluation
of UNCCD will ensure that the intended outcomes will achieved by NAP
intervention, .e.g., UNCCD 2018−2030 Strategic Framework
Monitoring of NAP is critical to secure long-term funding. If it is to be
implemented successfully, the NAP must be an adaptive management process that
can recommend change where desired results are not being achieved either in the
implementation process or in the resultant consequences of implementation.
Furthermore, the NAP requires a significant commitment of human and
financial resources, for which there are many competing uses. The various
outcomes of the NAP are cross-cutting in nature and will require sound
monitoring and coordination to achieve the intended results per outcome.
The Committee for the Review of the Implementation of the Convention
(CRIC) was established in 2001, as a subsidiary body to the Conference of
Parties (COP).
Its goal is to assist the COP in regularly reviewing the implementation of
the Convention. CRIC is also an integral part of the Performance Review and
Assessment of Implementation System (PRAIS).

--- Page 117 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 109
14- References
Abdelhafez, A.A., Abbas, M.H. and Attia, T. M. S. (2015).
Environmental monitoring of heavy mineral status and human health
risk assessment in the soil of Sahl El Hassania area, Egypt. Pol. J.
Environ. Stud. 24: 459-467.
Balbaa and Mansour (2023). Enhancing women status in Egypt Agriculture
sector. https://aps.aucegypt.edu/en/articles/1328/enhancing-women-status-
in- egypts-agriculture-sector-the-role-of-policy-iterventions.
Boulos, L. (2008). Flora and Vegetation of the Deserts of Egypt. — Fl. Medit.
18: 341-359. ISSN 1120-4052.
Boyd R. D. (2023). The overlooked environmental and human rights crisis:
desertification, land degradation and drought. UN human rights special
procedures.
Bubenzer, O., Embabi N. S. and Ashour, M. M. (2020). Sand seas and dune
fields of egypt. Geoscience, 10(3).
CAPMAS (2022). Annual Bulletin of lands Reclamation 2020/2021. Central
Agency for Public Mobilization and Statistics, ARE. Ref. No. 71-22128-
2021.
CAPMAS (2022). Annual Bulletin of Environmental Statistics. Part One:
Environmental conditions and quality 2020. Central Agency for Public
Mobilization and Statistics ARE. Ref. No-71-22301-2020.
CAPMAS (2022). Annual Bulletin of irrigation and water resources statistics
2021. Central Agency for Public Mobilization and Statistics ARE.
Ref. No-71-22126-2021.
CAPMAS (2022). Statistical Year Book. 2022. Central Agency for Public
Mobilization and Statistic ARE. Ref. No. 71-01111-2022.
CAPMAS (2023). Annual Bulletin of Statistical Crop Area and Plant
Production 2020/2021. Central Agency for Public Mobilization and
Statistics ARE. Ref. No. 71-22122-2021.
CAPMAS (2023). Egypt in figures (2023). Central Agency for Public
Mobilization and Statistics, ARE. Ref. No. 71-01112-2023.

--- Page 118 ---
Desert Research Center
110
CAPMAS (2023). Annual Bulletin of Statistics Livestock 2021, Central
Agency for Public Mobilization and Statistics, ARE. Ref. No. 22111-
2021.
CAPMAS (2023). Annual Bulletin of Statistics of Fish Production, 2021.
Central Agency for Public Mobilization and Statistics, ARE. Ref. No.
22112-2021.
DRC (2005). Egypt’s national action program to combat desertification report.
Ministry of Agriculture & Land Reclamation, Desert Research Center,
Egypt.
DRC (2018). Final country report of the land degradation neutrality target
setting programme. UNCCD, 35p.
Egyptian Environmental Affairs Agency (2016). Egypt third national
communication under the united nations framework convention on climate
change.
https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/TNC%20report.pdf
El Alfy,M. A., El-Amier,Y.A. and Abd-El-Hamid, H. T. (2017). Soil
quality and health risk assessment of heavy menerales in agriculture
areas irrigated with wastewater from Kitchener drain, Nile Delta,
Egypt. J. SCI. Agric.1: 158-170.
El bana, T., Gaber, H. M. and Kishk, F. M. (2019). Soil chemical pollution
and sustainable agriculture: In, El- Ramady, H. and Others:
editors, the soils of Egypt. World soils Book Series, PP: 187-200.
El-Gamily, H., Omar, S. and Misak, R. (2010). Shifting sand as a natural
hazard for agricultural lands in the Arab World, International
Conference, November, 30 – December, 2, 2010, Kuwait.
Embabi, N. S. (2000). Sand dunes in Egypt. In sedimentary Geology of Egypt,
Applications and Econmics. Book of Century, part1: pp 45-87.
FAO (2016). Land Cover Classification System (LCCS): Classification Concepts
and User Manual. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, Rome.
FAO/UNESCO (1998). World Reference Base for Soil Resources. Rep. 84, Rome.
https: //en. Wikipedia . org/ wiki/ Demographics of Egypt.

--- Page 119 ---
Egypt’s National Action Plan (NAP) to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, 2024 – 2030 111
Hereher, M. E. (2015). Coastal vulnerability assessment for Egypts
Medilerranean coast. Geomatics, Natural Hazards Risk, 2015, Vol. 6,
No4, 342-355
Masria, A. , Negm, A., Iskander, M. and Saavedra, O. (2014). Coastal zone
issues: a case study (Egypt). Procedia Engineering 70, 1102-1111.
Shadad, S. M. and Hendawi, M. Y. (2018). Site – specific leaching map of
salt affected soil in Egypt. Biomed. J. Sci and Tech. Res. Vol. 2, Issue
4-2768-2773.
UNDP (2018). National Adaptation Plans in Focus: Lessons from Egypt. URL:
https://www.adaptation-undp.org/sites/default/files/resources/naps_
WAD (2019). world Atlas of Desertification. https//wad. Jrc.ec.europa,eu/ Europe.
World Bank (2002): Arab Republic of Egypt, Coast Assessment of Environment
Rural Development Department Middle East and with Africa region 19p.
Yossif, T. M. (2019). Land cover change monitoring in Egypt using satellite
imagery. International Journal of Environment, 8, 151 - 161.
: ةرهاقلا . 2050 ماع ىتح ةيئاملا د راوملا ةرادإو ةيمنت ةيجيترا تسا .)2010( يرلاو ةيئاملا دراوملا ةرزاو
) Ministry of Water Resources and Irrigation, 2010(
. يرلاو ةيئاملا د راوملا ةرزاو
.2018/2017 ماعل ر صم يف ةيئاملا ت امادختسلال ي بسنلا عيزوتلا .(2018) يرلاو ةيئاملا دراوملا ةرزاو
. ىرلاو ةيئاملا دراوملا ةرزاو :ةرهاقلا