--- Page 1 ---
Land degradation is a threat to the livelihoods of millions of people in the world’s drylands. Desertification,
land degradation, and drought caused by human activities and climatic variations are having a huge toll on
human well-being and the environment and hence rank among the greatest development challenges of our 1
time. The United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification facilitates international efforts to prevent
land degradation, mitigate the effects of drought, and alleviate poverty by requiring countries party to the
convention to prepare and implement National Action Programmes. Somalia became a signatory to the
convention in 2002 and thereafter formulated this National Action Programme.
Approximately 70 percent of the Somali population are dependent on natural resources for their
pastoralist and agricultural livelihoods. Land degradation is adversely affecting the productivity of Somalia National SAOcMtioAnLI A NATIONAL
both pastoralism and agriculture and therefore undermines the fight against poverty and hunger. Land
degradation particularly threatens the medium- to long-term sustainability of pastoral systems since
ACTION PROGRAMME
degraded rangelands cannot support the feeding requirements of animal populations. The National Action Programme for the
Programme identifies priority action areas and sets out an implementation plan to reverse desertification
and land degradation and to mitigate the effects of drought. for the
United Nations Convention to
UNITED NATIONS
Combat Desertification
CONVENTION TO COMBAT
DESERTIFICATION
Federal Government
of Somalia
Federal Government
of Somalia

--- Page 2 ---
2 SOMALIA NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMME FOR THE UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION TO COMBAT DESERTIFICATION
UNDP partners with people at all levels of society to help build nations that can withstand
crisis, and drive and sustain the kind of growth that improves the quality of life for
everyone. On the ground in more than 170 countries and territories, we offer global
perspective and local insight to help empower lives and build resilient nations.
Copyright © United Nations Development Programme Somalia 2016
Content: Harum Mukhayer and Hassan Abdirizak (UNDP Somalia)
Editing and design: Edward Miller
Photos: © United Nations Development Programme Somalia, unless otherwise indicated
Printing: UNON / Publishing Services Section, Nairobi ISO 14001: 2004-certified

--- Page 3 ---
3
Somalia National
Action Programme
for the United Nations
Convention to Combat
Desertification

--- Page 4 ---
4 SOMALIA NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMME FOR THE UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION TO COMBAT DESERTIFICATION
CONTENTS
Foreword 6
Message from the Prime Minister of Somalia 7
1. Background 8
1.1 Country Profile 8
1.2 Location and Size 8
1.3 Population 9
1.4 Climate 9
1.5 Physical Geography 9
2. Introduction 10
2.1 The Somali Connection to Land 10
2.2 Key Messages from the National Action Plan Consultative Process 12
2.3 The Somali Approach to Desertification, Land Degradation, and Drought 15
3. The Status of Land Degradation 17
3.1 Causes of Desertification, Land Degradation, and Drought 19
3.2 Consequences of Desertification, Land Degradation, and Drought on Natural Resources 24
4. The Socio-economic Impact of Land Degradation in Somalia 29
4.1 Demographics and Changing Land Use 20
4.2 Gender and Desertification, Land Degradation, and Drought 31
4.3 Development Planning and Decentralized Local Governance 31
4.4 Conflict and the Use of Violence 32
5. Somalia National Action Programme Process 41
5.1 Somali Priorities under the Rio Convention 41
5.2 Sustainable Development Goals and the Somalia National Action Programme 42
5.3 Intended Nationally Determined Contributions, the Paris Agreement, and the Somalia National 43
Action Programme
5.4 Somalia National Action Programme Special Considerations 43

--- Page 5 ---
5
6. Somalia National Action Programme 2015–2030: Towards Land Degradation Neutrality 45
6.1 Programme Areas 45
6.2 National Action Programme Alignment to the UN Convention to Combat Desertification Ten- 45
year Strategy
6.3 Somalia National Action Programme Implementation 56
7. Implementation Arrangements 60
7.1 Implementation Mechanism 60
7.2 Monitoring and Evaluation 61
References 62
Annex I 66
Annex II 68
ACRONYMS
DLDD desertification, land degradation, and drought
ELD economics of land degradation
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
NAP National Action Programme
NAPA National Adaptation Plan of Action
NBSAP National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan
NGO non-governmental organization
NRM natural resource management
SWALIM Somalia Water and Land Information Management
UN-Habitat United Nations Human Settlements Programme
UN-OCHA United Nations Office for Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
UNCCD United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification
UNDP United Nations Development Programme
UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
UNFPA United Nations Populations Fund

--- Page 6 ---
6 SOMALIA NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMME FOR THE UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION TO COMBAT DESERTIFICATION
FOREWORD
Land degradation is a threat to the livelihoods of millions of people in the world’s
drylands. Desertification, land degradation, and drought caused by human activi-
ties and climatic variations are having a huge toll on human well-being and the
environment and hence rank among the greatest development challenges of our time.
The United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD) facilitates
international efforts to prevent land degradation, mitigate the effects of drought,
and alleviate poverty by requiring countries party to the convention to prepare and
implement National Action Programmes (NAPs). Somalia became a signatory to the
UNCCD in 2002 and has formulated this NAP to fulfil its first obligation under the
convention.
Approximately 70 percent of the Somali population are dependent on natural resources for their pastoralist and agricultural
livelihoods. Land degradation is adversely affecting the productivity of both pastoralism and agriculture and therefore undermines
the fight against poverty and hunger. Land degradation particularly threatens the medium- to long-term sustainability of pastoral
systems since degraded rangelands cannot support the feeding requirements of animal populations.
The National Action Programme identifies priority action areas and sets out an implementation plan to reverse desertification and
land degradation and to mitigate the effects of drought. The NAP was formulated through a participatory, bottom-up approach
involving the concerned stakeholders and was led by the Office of Environmental Affairs at the Office of the Prime Minister. The
NAP is also aligned with the UNCCD Ten-year Strategic Plan.
I commend the Federal Government of Somalia for its leadership of the NAP formulation process and for ensuring strong participa-
tion across Somali society. The NAP is an important document that will help the government and development partners address
desertification, land degradation, and drought, increase the resilience of the economy, and contribute to the achievement of the
Sustainable Development Goals. The UN will continue to support the Federal Government of Somalia in its efforts to tackle land
degradation and promote sustainable social and economic development.
George Conway
Country Director
United Nations Development Programme Somalia

--- Page 7 ---
7
MESSAGE FROM
THE PRIME
MINISTER
Land degradation is the most serious environmental
challenge facing Somalia. It is adversely affecting the
productivity of both pastoralism and agriculture, which
are the backbone of Somalia’s economy. To address
this challenge, Somalia acceded to the United Nations
Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD) in
2002. As its first commitment under the UNCCD,
the Federal Republic of Somalia has produced the
Somali National Action Programme (NAP) to combat
desertification and reduce the effects of drought. The NAP was produced through wide-ranging consultations held in different parts
of the country. It represents collective efforts towards sustainable land management and the integrated management of land – both
the resources that lie on its surface and those in its subsoil. Regulation and sustainable management of communal grazing lands,
curtailing of urban sprawl, mitigation of the effects of land degradation, and proper planning and construction of infrastructure and
road networks to minimize the effects of land degradation (particularly gully erosion) and natural disasters are the priority action
areas in the NAP. The NAP is aligned with the UNCCD Ten-year Strategy (2008–2018) adopted at the Eighth Conference of
Parties, which advocates for the alignment of country NAPs to the strategy.
On behalf of the Federal Government of Somalia and the Somali people, I would like to register my sincere appreciation of all the
stakeholders who participated in the consultations and contributed to the formulation of the NAP. Special recognition is due to the
United Nations Development Programme, in partnership with the State Minister of Environment, Office of Environmental Affairs
at the Office of the Prime Minister, for achieving this substantial milestone. I would also like to sincerely thank the United Nations
Environment Programme for their financial support.
Finally, I am confident that UNDP, UNEP, and other partners will provide technical and financial support for the implementation
of the National Action Programme herein, as this will greatly contribute to the achievement of the global Sustainable Development
Goals.
H.E. Hassan Ali Khaire
Prime Minister of the Federal Government of Somalia

--- Page 8 ---
8 SOMALIA NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMME FOR THE UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION TO COMBAT DESERTIFICATION
1. BACKGROUND
1.1 COUNTRY Extreme weather and climate change Extreme weather and
further aggravate natural resources in
PROFILE climate change further
Somalia, most notably by increasing
spatial and temporal variability of the aggravate natural
Somalia has been in state of conflict rainy and dry seasons, floods, and
resources in Somalia, most
and civil strife for over two decades droughts. These adverse environmental
after the collapse of the central impacts and the mismanagement notably by increasing
government at beginning of the 1990s. of natural resources are negatively
spatial and temporal
Due to the absence of a functioning affecting the country’s economy, since
central government and the weaken- approximately 70 percent of Somalis variability of the rainy and
ing of traditional management and are dependent on climate-sensitive
dry seasons, floods, and
enforcement mechanisms, the country’s agriculture and pastoralism.
droughts
environment was severely degraded.
Uncontrolled exploitation of natural
resources has led to severe environmen- 1.2 LOCATION AND
tal degradation in many parts of the
SIZE
country (United Nations, World Bank,
2006). Huge areas that were once tree-
covered rangelands have been reduced The Federal Republic of Somalia is
to treeless plains; the result has been located on the easternmost point of the
disappearing wildlife and soil erosion. African continent. It has a land area of
Approximately 35,000 hectares of land 637,540 km² and is situated between
are deforested each year for charcoal 2 degrees South and 12 degrees North
production in spite of a national ban and 41 and 52 degrees East. Somalia
against the damaging practice. Scarcity is surrounded by the Gulf of Aden
of fresh water, severe erosion such as to the north, the Indian Ocean to
gullying, land degradation resulting the east, Kenya and Ethiopia to the
from charcoal production, and siltation west, and Djibouti to the north-west.
of water bodies are also major issues. Somalia has the longest coastline
Marine resources have also been among the countries of the African
damaged due to illegal overfishing and continent, with estimates ranging from
damage to marine habitats (UNEP, 3,333–3,898 km.
2006).

--- Page 9 ---
9
1.3 POPULATION 1.4 CLIMATE extreme weather conditions, including
high mean surface temperatures,
periods of extended drought,
The population of Somalia was Somalia generally has an arid to
highly erratic rainfall, and strong
estimated to be 12.31 million in 2014. semi-arid climate. Rainfall in the
winds (NAPA, 2013: 14). The country
About 22.8 percent of the Somali country is low and has high spatial
can be divided in to five different
population live in rural areas, and 25.9 and temporal variability. The climate
geographic zones: the northern coastal
percent are nomadic. Urban dwellers of Somalia is determined by the
plains (Guban); Gollis mountain range
make up about 42.4 percent of the north- and southward movement of
(northern highlands); central coastal
population, while internally displaced the Inter-tropical Convergence Zone.
plains, with a wide sand dune system;
persons account for 9 percent. The In most areas of Somalia, this results in
a broad limestone/sandstone plateau
annual growth rate is estimated at 2.8 two rainy seasons: the Gu as the zone
covering all of central and southern
percent. The Somali population is passes northward, and the Deyr on its
Somalia; and floodplains of the Juba
youthful, with over 70 percent of the southward movement. In both cases,
and Shabelle Rivers in the south,
population under the age of 30 years the rain is produced as the moist air
which provide the highest agricultural
(UNFPA, 2014). The net migration from the Indian Ocean meets up with
potential.
for Somalia is negative, with 150,000 the Inter-tropical Convergence Zone.
people emigrating from the country The north-easterly winds from Asia
The predominant hydrographical
in 2012 (IOM, 2014). More than and Arabia produce little significant
features of Somalia are the downstream
1 million Somalis live as part of the rain.
stretches of the two main permanent
diaspora in numerous countries and
rivers of the Horn of Africa, both of
remain actively engaged in supporting
which flow from the highlands of
the country through financial remit- 1.5 PHYSICAL
Ethiopia towards the Indian Ocean:
tances and other forms of support.
GEOGRAPHY the Juba, which flows in Somalia for
Over 1 million Somalis are refugees,
more than 1,000 km out of its 1,800
located primarily in Kenya, Ethiopia,
km of total length, and the Shabelle,
Yemen, South Africa, and Djibouti.
The terrain of Somalia consists of
which extends for more than 1,200
Also, 1.1 to 1.36 million Somalis, or
mainly arid and semi-arid plateaus,
km from the Somali-Ethiopian border
about 9 percent of the population, are
plains, and highlands. Arid and
to its confluence with the Juba (WFP,
internally displaced persons (IOM,
semi-arid lands make up more than 80
2016: 258).
2014).
percent of Somalia’s landmass. These
areas are characteristically prone to

--- Page 10 ---
10 SOMALIA NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMME FOR THE UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION TO COMBAT DESERTIFICATION
2. INTRODUCTION
The Federal Republic of Somalia is Somalia has produced the Somalia operational objectives that are to be
signatory to all the Rio conventions NAP through wide-ranging consulta- achieved over the course of ten years.
including the United Nations tions held in different parts of the Decision 3 of the eighth conference
Convention to Combat Desertification country. The Somalia NAP represents calls for affected countries to align their
(hereafter UNCCD), which it the collective effort towards sustainable National Action Programmes to the
signed in 2002. The UNCCD brings land management and the integrated ten-year strategy and also relate them
together all aspects of environment and management of land, the resources that to outcomes under the strategy’s five
sustainable land management in one lie on its surface, and its subsoil. operational objectives. It is against this
broad policy framework. Through a background that the Government of
bottom-up approach, the convention The predominantly pastoralist and Somalia is aligning its first National
promotes the formulation of integrated agro-pastoralist population of Somalia Action Programme with the ten-year
environmental and socio-economic depend on land for their livelihoods strategy.
policies to address the challenges of in both urban and rural areas and thus
desertification, land degradation, and are more susceptible to the impacts
drought. of desertification, land degradation, 2.1 THE SOMALI
and drought (DLDD). Combined
CONNECTION TO
Article 9 of the convention stipulates with unreliable and highly variable
that developing country parties for- rain cycles, the situation in Somalia
LAND
mulate National Action Programmes is highly complex and characterized
(NAPs) to combat desertification by extreme events such as floods and
and mitigate the effects of drought. droughts (UNDP/ICPAC, 2013). The Somali region is defined by
The preparation and implementation In strengthening the resilience of its ecology and characterized by
of the NAP should utilize and build the Somali population and enabling trans-boundary genealogical ties and
on existing relevant successful plans their adaption to the impacts of cross-border land use. Its boundaries
and programmes at regional and meteorological variations, the National are determined by the use of land
subregional levels for the attainment of Adaptation Plan of Action (NAPA) by people and their livestock. The
the convention’s objectives. As stated and the National Biodiversity Strategy territory and borders of the modern-
in Article 10 of the convention, the and Action Plan identify sustainable day Federal Republic of Somalia
purpose of the NAP is to identify the land management as a priority. represent the balance that needs to
factors contributing to desertification be maintained between building a
and the practical measures necessary to The eighth conference of parties of nation state and incorporating the
combat desertification and mitigate the the UNCCD unanimously adopted multitude of formal and informal
effects of drought. the ten-year (2008–2018) strategic structures for the governance of land
plan and framework to enhance the and natural resources. Land used for
As its first commitment under the implementation of the convention. grazing (sedentary or transhumant),
UNCCD, the Federal Republic of The strategy has four strategic and five agriculture, or charcoal production (as

--- Page 11 ---
11
well as other uses of flora and fauna) Hargeisa, Sheikh District, Bohotle or the introduction of berkads and the
is at the core of the Somali connection Burao town (Lewis, 1994), with each proliferation of boreholes, the dry
to land and the integrity of its territory territory (or deegaan) under the patron- season search for water and pasture
(Farah et al., 2002). age of the respective dominant clans would take pastoralists away from town
(Bradbury, 1996).1 centres to grazing areas in the Hawd
The interface between geomorphology, eco-zone (Killeh and Awale, 2003).
land cover, and patterns of land use In addition to forming part of Once pasture in one location was
are best demonstrated by the case of the caravan routes, Hargeisa, depleted, pastoralist nomads would
Somaliland. In the 1840s, the main Burao, and Sheikh formed natural relocate to another rangeland, reducing
urban centres were clustered along watering grounds along the seasonal grazing burden on one location and
the coastal cities of Zeila and Berbera watercourses of the Togdheer River allowing pasture to regenerate. This
(Burton, 1856; Swayne, 1905: 361). and Golis drainage basin. Prior to process was referred to as ‘traditional
These port cities formed the primary and natural rangeland management’ in
1 Bohotle and Sarar Plain caravans came under the Habar Tol
junctions for caravan routes traversed NAP stakeholder consultations.2
Ja’lo clan; at Burao Habar Yuunis; at Sheikj Habar Awal/Iise
by camels via the Sarar plains, Muuse; and Berbera Habar Awal Sa’ad Muuse; see Lewis, 1994:
115 and Lewis, 1999: 187.
2 This thinking also finds reference in Awale (2010), Awale et al.
(2005), and Unruh (1995a).

--- Page 12 ---
12 SOMALIA NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMME FOR THE UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION TO COMBAT DESERTIFICATION
The introduction of berkads into the and unsustainable subsistence pastoral- The Somalia NAP captures
dry Hawd zone in 1950s marked the ism and agro-pastoralism are prevalent.
recommendations from the
start of a trend that characterizes the Land degradation further amplifies the
pattern of environmental degradation impact of social and economic systems consultative process and
in the Somali region (Killeh and Awale, on the natural environment. These
proposes activities towards
2003). The construction of berkads factors exist in parallel and pervade all
encourages permanent settlements aspects of Somali life – social, cultural, reversing desertification
and concentrated patterns of land use economic, and political.
and land degradation and
and grazing (Academy for Peace and
Development, 2002). As the numbers The Somalia NAP captures recom- mitigating the effects of
of settlements and berkads continue to mendations from the consultative
drought
grow, this increases the demand for fuel process and proposes activities towards
wood, timber for fencing and shelter, reversing desertification and land
and other consumable goods. These degradation and mitigating the effects
predominantly pastoralist settlers then of drought. As the Somali connec-
engage in commercial activities and tion to land is shaped by the use of
trade, exchanging milk and livestock resources on the surface and subsoil of
for food products and other commodi- land, the input of stakeholders at the
ties not locally available (e.g. sugar, tea, federal government level – as well as in
spaghetti, rice, etc.). the states of Somaliland and Puntland,
where land degradation is most
Trucks now convey goods previously prevalent – has aided the formulation
transported by foot or on camelback. of a holistic approach to DLDD,
In the absence of reliable road elaborated in Section 2.3 below.
networks, truck drivers are forced to
carve their own pathways between
settlements. This process of truck 2.2 KEY MESSAGES
conveyance between rapidly growing
FROM THE
settlements and their increasing
demands for consumable goods further
NATIONAL
exacerbates the degradation of land.
The overuse of these pathways by water ACTION PLAN
trucks or traders causes soil compac-
CONSULTATIVE
tion, making land susceptible to water
and wind erosion. The occurrence of
PROCESS
torrential rains deepens the cracks in
the soil and forms gullies.
Consultations for the Somalia
Throughout the Somali region these NAP and the Economics of Land
patterns of unplanned urban sprawl, Degradation (ELD) Initiative were
unregulated groundwater extraction, conducted in Hargeisa, Garowe, and

--- Page 13 ---
13
Mogadishu. Focus group discussions by stakeholders consulted throughout the Juba and Shabelle Rivers also
and consultative workshops were held Somalia. The key stakeholder messages severely affect agricultural production
in April–July 2015 in Somaliland that have influenced the direction of in the country by destroying crops and
(Hargeisa) and Puntland (Garowe), the Somali NAP and the proposed on-farm infrastructure, hence affecting
while the consultations at the federal Somali approach are listed in the two the food security of the country.
government level (Mogadishu) were following sections. The threats to livelihoods and food
conducted in February 2016 (see Table security that result from DLDD were
2.1). In Somaliland, the consulta- the primary concern of the majority
tions brought together traditional National Desertification, of the stakeholders consulted. The
elders, ministers, and representatives Land Degradation, and national economy’s dependence on
from each of the environment line land for grazing, livestock production,
Drought Concerns
ministries, as well as non-governmental and agricultural production was
organizations (NGOs) and land users. also considered a critical part of the
Food insecurity and dependence of
The Puntland consultations were rationale for immediate and concerted
the national economy on land
focused on government officials and efforts to combat DLDD.
district representatives. The consulta-
The combined effects of drought and
tions at the federal level brought Escalating land conflicts as evidence
floods have resulted in soil and land
together stakeholders from 12 different of the immediate need for action
degradation, reducing the growth of
federal ministries.
grass and browse biomass and the
Competition for grazing land and
capacity to recuperate from drought
There was a unanimous and strong af- water points, which is leading to
and overgrazing. This reduces the
firmation that immediate action needs increasing incidents of land conflict,
production and productivity of
to be undertaken to reverse desertifica- is considered evidence that supports
livestock and impacts the food security
tion and land degradation and mitigate immediate action to reverse DLDD,
of pastoralists. Recurrent floods along
the effects of drought. This was echoed whether it relates to sustainably
Table 2.1: National Action Programme Consultation Process
Place Date Regional Representation Number of Participants
Hargeisa 5–6 May 2015 Awdal, Maroodi-Jeex, Saxil, 77
Sanaag, Sool, Togdheer
Garowe 12–13 May 2015 Bari, Nugaal, North Mudug, 20
17 June 2015 Sanaag, Sool, Ayn, Hilan, 13
Karkar regions
Mogadishu 8 February 2016 Federal-level ministries 40
Interview/questionnaire respondents 150
Total number of participants consulted and interviewed 150

--- Page 14 ---
14 SOMALIA NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMME FOR THE UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION TO COMBAT DESERTIFICATION

--- Page 15 ---
15
managing land in conflict-affected are also considered an immediate challenges for medium- to long-term
areas (e.g. the north-eastern border cause of persistent land degradation mapping, national planning, and
regions between Somaliland and in the Hawd zone, Nugaal Valley, and early warning. Furthermore, it limits
Puntland) or reducing the occurrence Karkar/Darood Valley. the understanding and prediction of
of conflict over land and scarce localized incidents of drought and the
resources in the other parts of the management of livestock migration
country. Call for Immediate Action routes.
Localized incidents of drought Pastoralists are viewed as having first
rights to land 2.3 SOMALI
Traditional elders in Gumburaha vil-
APPROACH TO
lage flagged the occurrence of localized The federal government and regional
incidents of drought as one of the governments expressed commitment DESERTIFICATION,
key problems facing Somaliland. This towards securing communal access
phenomenon is also apparent in parts to and use of rangeland resources LAND
of Somalia. It manifests in one region for pastoralist communities, with
DEGRADATION,
suffering extreme droughts (through emphasis on safeguarding communal
two or three missed cycles of rain), rights against land grabbing and illegal AND DROUGHT
while an adjacent region 10 to 15 km enclosures. The role of elders was
away receives regular seasonal showers. considered critical.
The Somali approach to DLDD
Unplanned urban sprawl and an Decentralized service delivery and emerged in response to the competing
absence of necessary infrastructure enforcement and overlapping demands on land
by different stakeholders. Through
Traditionally, pastoralists used camels, Strengthening district-level service de- focus group discussions, consultative
horses, and donkeys to transport livery and the enforcement of land-use workshops, and questionnaires,
water, consumable goods, and people. laws and policies by local governments stakeholder input was gathered and
Pastoralists, mainly in the northern was considered a key starting point. synthesized. This approach draws on
and north-eastern regions, have shifted This will particularly involve working the interface between the nature of
from this traditional mode of trans- with land users through Village Somali ecology, the demands of its
port, and trucks are increasingly being Development Committees, both modern economy, and the systems
used. Since there are no feeder roads in areas where there is government in place for the administration and
to household settlements, each truck presence as well as in administratively governance of land and its resources
carves its own road in the plateaus and unstable regions. (Figure 2.1). The aim is to understand
valleys; this destroys grass and leads localized incidents of drought and land
to soil compaction and the formation Lack of seasonally disaggregated degradation so as to better enforce
of gullies, which expand every rainy baseline data measures for their mitigation.
season. Mushrooming small villages
and mobile camps and the unplanned The complete lack of seasonally Ecological Units: Different and
expansion of cities into grazing lands disaggregated land-use data provides overlapping uses of land and its

--- Page 16 ---
16 SOMALIA NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMME FOR THE UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION TO COMBAT DESERTIFICATION
resources exist in parallel – a perma- for consumables such as sugar, tea, rice, prior consent and permission must
nent settlement also hosts livestock in and spaghetti forms the basic transac- be acquired from a pastoralist com-
need of grazing, small parcels of land tions of an average village economy in munity through Village Development
for fodder and crop production, and Somalia. Committees and traditional elders.
berkads for watering livestock, irriga- Access to and use of resources is then
tion, and domestic use. Administration and Governance: granted, depending on the time and
Communal lands may cut across duration of the agreement between
Economic Zones: The demand for different administrative borders. These communities. Such agreements are a
certain commodities necessitates trade lands are open to grazing, and it is con- fundamental part of customary law,
among different town centres. The sidered unacceptable to exclude others known as xeer.
exchange of milk, livestock, and fodder from the use of rangelands. However,
Figure 2.1: Somali Connection to Land – NAP/ELD Conceptual Framework
How rights to access and use are enforced
Ecological Units
Overlap among
Economic Zones
ecological units,
economic zones, and
Administrative Borders
administrative borders
Where land is located Transactions and
exchange among
SURFACE WATER resource users
VEGETATION COVER
LAND (as topsoil)
Somali Connection to Land
Groundwater Oil, Gas, Minerals
Source: NAP/ELD Consultations; adapted from Somaliland and Puntland 2014 NRM Sector Studies and Mukhayer (2012)

--- Page 17 ---
17
3. STATUS OF LAND DEGRADATION
The Somali landscape is predominantly low agricultural potential in Somalia. Land degradation is a
arid and semiarid, with annual rainfall Recent spatial studies extrapolated
major threat to ecosystem
ranging from 250 millimetres in the on local findings to point out that
northern plains to approximately 400 land degradation is increasing in both functioning in the areas
mm in the south and 700 mm in the severity and extent in many parts of
classified as having both
south-west (Somalia NAPA, 2013; the country. Remote sensing analysis
FAO SWALIM, 2009). Within each classified about one-third (~31 percent) high and low agricultural
region and across catchment areas, of the country as degraded and 17
potential in Somalia
there are wide spatial and temporal percent as exhibiting evidence of land
variations in the rainfall patterns. For condition improvements (Omuto et
example, coastal areas adjacent to the al., 2011). The most productive areas
Gulf of Aden receive less than 20 mm of the country, the Shebelle and Juba
of average rainfall annually, whereas the basins, are experiencing the highest risk
western parts of the Togdheer/Nugaal of degradation due to deforestation,
basin receive 240 mm per year. overgrazing, poor cultivation methods,
and land fragmentation (General
Similarly, the Dharoor Basin in the Service Agency, 2016).
north-east of Somalia receives 93 mm
per year of rainfall on average, whereas In the Somali region, DLDD occurs
annual rainfall in the south-east Lag in different forms and varies in
Badana basins averages 549 mm severity depending on a number of
per year (FAO SWALIM, 2012). In factors. Factors contributing to the
addition to spatial variations of rainfall type, duration, or intensity of land
across catchment areas, there are wide degradation include the environmental
variations within catchment areas. and biophysical condition of land;
For example, the Juba and Shabelle the socio-economic uses of land; the
upper catchments in the Ethiopian type of land-use management system;
highlands receive 1,300–1,800 mm/ and the formal or informal regulatory
year, whereas annual rainfall at Luuq framework.
and Beledweyne averages 271 mm and
330 mm respectively. The most prevalent types of land
degradation are the following:
Land degradation is a major threat • Soil degradation through water,
to ecosystem functioning in the areas wind, and chemical erosion
classified as having both high and • Water degradation, resulting in

--- Page 18 ---
18 SOMALIA NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMME FOR THE UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION TO COMBAT DESERTIFICATION
aridification and a decline in
BASELINE INFORMATION
surface water quality
• Biological degradation, which
includes the loss of biomass, Population 12.3 million
vegetation cover, and biodiversity Urban 5,216,392
Nomads 3,186,965
Land degradation has contributed to
Rural 2,806,787
loss of vegetation, gully erosion, loss of
Internally displaced persons 1,106,751
topsoil, siltation of surface dams and
irrigation canals, invasive non-palatable Source: UNFPA (2014)
Land Cover Change 1988–2001
plant species, and loss of plant nutri-
ents in areas with agricultural potential Woodland - 88.8%
(FAO SWALIM, 2009; NBSAP, 2015). Open shrubs - 06.2%
See Figure 3.1. Sparse shrubs +123.6%
Bare soils +168.8
Somalia’s arid and semiarid landscape
Annual soil loss > 20-ton/ ha-1
is at a high risk of desertification
Source: FAO SWALIM (2007)
(International Institute for Sustainable
Primary Land Uses
Development, 2015) and is prone
to extreme variations in weather Irrigated 1%
conditions (Somalia NAPA, 2013). Rainfed 7%
The unpredictability of these variations Natural 83%
includes high diurnal temperature
Bare areas 11.7%
ranges, torrential rains, periods of ex-
Surface water 1.6%
tended drought, highly erratic rainfall,
Built areas 0.1%
and strong winds (International Union
Source: Somali NBSAP (2015)
for Conservation of Nature, 2006). As
Estimated Cost of Land Degradation
a result, Somalis are in a constant flux
between two extremes: adapting to 154,000 km2 of degraded land costs approximately US$1.54 billion annually
prolonged droughts and coping with Source: Roba et al. (2013: 13)
recurring flooding. Land as Portion of Gross Domestic Product Estimates
Somalia GDP (2010) US$5.8 billion
This creates a dual effect whereby
Percentage: livestock and crops 40%
drought degrades vegetation cover
Somaliland GDP (2012) US$1,390 million
(biological degradation), leaving the
Percentage: livestock industry 29.5%
soil exposed (wind and water erosion)
Percentage: crops 08.2 %
to variable and torrential rain that
washes away remaining nutrients, a Source: African Development Bank (2013), World Bank (2014), MoPS (2003)
process referred to as chemical ero-
sion through soil degradation (FAO

--- Page 19 ---
19
SWALIM, 2007). In southern Somalia,
Figure 3.1: Actual Land Degradation
lower elevations and river floods
further exacerbate the situation.
3.1 CAUSES OF
DESERTIFICATION,
LAND
DEGRADATION,
AND DROUGHT
Soil Formation and
Erosion
Historical accounts of the process of
soil formation and soil erosion point
to early incidents of degradation and
drought starting from as early as 1885
(Hemming, 1966; Swayne, 1903).
Soil in Somalia is among the most
extensively studied aspects of the
Somali geomorphology. In explanation
of variations in land cover between
proximate locations, the Somali
terrains – for example, sub-desert
shrub and grass and coastal formula-
tions in southern Somalia – have been
described as edaphic (Hemming,
1966).
In these regions, one patch of land
presents characteristically different
soil qualities from another patch of
land within the same ecological zone.
Source: MESA/ICPAC 2012
Wind-induced movements and range
erosion transport soil, overlaying
downward slopes to remote locations,

--- Page 20 ---
20 SOMALIA NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMME FOR THE UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION TO COMBAT DESERTIFICATION
which alter the composition of topsoil lower edge, and lower side (Hemming, The traditional nomadic
(Watson and Nimmo, 1985) and reveal 1965). The centre of an arc is charac-
system of pastoralism in
underlying layers of soil or introduce terized by dense grass; a clearly defined
surface layers of sand. upper edge is typically colonized by Somalia is characterized by
small grasses and soil deposition; a
high mobility; the seasonal
Predominately, the extreme and poorly defined lower edge is marked by
uniform climate in parts of the Somali pathways of excess drainage water; and movement is essential for
plains contributes to zonal vegetation the lower side of the arc has dead trees
pastoralists to manage
that is monotonous, with low numbers on bare ground (Hemming, 1965).
of plant species (FAO SWALIM, The occurrence of vegetation arcs spatial and temporal
2007). Large tracts of land are presents a plausible explanation for the
changes in grazing
sparsely vegetated, and areas with some incidents of localized drought reported
vegetation (predominately Chrysopogon by stakeholders during the NAP/ELD resources while enabling
aucheri var. quinqueplumis) are heavily consultations.
pasture recuperation
grazed. Between vast and sparsely
vegetated plains, the occurrence of In northern Somali rangelands,
common patterns of vegetation, mature soils with deep profiles are rare
referred to as vegetation arcs, has (Watson, 1982; Hemming, 1966). The
been described as a key feature of soil average potential annual soil loss for an
characteristics (Macfadyen, 1950; area of 13,000 hectares in Somaliland
Boaler and Hodge, 1964; Hemming, is estimated at slightly over 20 tons per
1965). hectare (FAO SWALIM, 2009). Due
to limited concentrations of sparsely
Vegetation arcs are bands of vegetation vegetated land cover, the overexploita-
separated by nearly bare ground and tion of trees for fuel wood, fencing,
with the uphill edge lying very nearly and shelter can quickly escalate into
parallel to the contour line (Boaler deforestation and desertification.
and Hodge, 1964: 515). The scale of
a single strand within a vegetation arc
and intervening desert averages about Overgrazing
160 metres, but may range from 70 to
300 metres. The length of an indi- The traditional nomadic system of
vidual arc is variable and may surpass 2 pastoralism in Somalia is characterized
kilometres (Macfadyen, 1950). by high mobility in search of pasture
and water. The seasonal movement
Vegetation arcs are commonly divided is essential for pastoralists to manage
into four distinguishable segments spatial and temporal changes in grazing
(Figure 3.2)1: centre, upper edge, resources while enabling pasture
1 Plan of the vegetation arc showing the distribution of trees recuperation. Mobility provides
and shrubs: 1) Acacia senegal var. kerensis (1.5–2.5 m tall); 2) the best strategy to manage low net
A. mellifera (3 m); 3) Boscia minimifoli (1–2.5 m); 4) Bos wellia
bricchetti (1–4 m); 5) Commiphora spp. (2–3 m); 6) Cadaba glandulosa (1 m); 7) Dalbergia commiphoroides (1–5.3 m); 8)
Grewia tenax (1.5 m); 9) Sterculia rhynchocarpa (3.5 m).

--- Page 21 ---
21
productivity unpredictability and enabling pastoralists to stay for longer Dharoor basins in the north, and the
risk in the arid and semiarid lands of periods in fewer settlements. This has Juba, Shabelle, and Laag Dheera River
Somalia. However, emerging develop- resulted in extensive overgrazing and basins in the south. Its topography
ments in the past few decades such as rangeland degradation. generally slopes in a south-eastern
the proliferation of unplanned water direction towards the Indian Ocean
reservoirs, berkads, transportation of (Awise, 2009, cited in FAO SWALIM,
water in tankers, and the establishment Hydrogeology of Somalia 2012). The highest elevations are in
of unregulated permanent enclosures the north-east along the Golis range
on communal grazing lands are chang- Somalia lies downstream of five river of mountains in the Gulf of Aden.
ing the traditional nomadic systems by basins: the Gulf of Aden, Nugaal, and South of the Golis mountains, the
Figure 3.2: Vegetation Arc in Somaliland
Source: Hemming (1965)

--- Page 22 ---
22 SOMALIA NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMME FOR THE UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION TO COMBAT DESERTIFICATION
topography of Somalia can be classified During the rainy season,2 some of resulting in the formation of deep
as gently sloping, with average slopes the same regions that experience gullies that continually are deepened
of less than ~1–2 percent (Kammer, severe droughts become inundated and enlarged.
1989, cited in FAO SWALIM, 2012). due to river floods along the Juba and
Shabelle Rivers in southern Somalia The carrying capacity of the degraded
In the south, the Juba and Shabelle and flash floods in the seasonal rangelands is diminished and can no
River basins are the two major catch- rivers in the north (FAO SWALIM, longer support the feeding require-
ments contributing to surface flow in 2015; Roba et al., 2013; Guleid et ments of animal populations. This
southern Somalia. The Laag Dheera al., 2007). In combination with the further threatens the medium- and
catchment joins the Juba basin in the climatic conditions in the transbound- longer-term sustainability of the
lower reaches of southern Somalia ary river basins, temporal patterns of pastoral economy.
(FAO SWALIM, 2012). The Juba and high rainfall variability over Somalia
Shabelle River basins are shared with further exacerbate events such as floods NAP consultations and the existing
Ethiopia and Kenya, with most parts of and droughts impacting the country literature reveal the complexity of
both basins lying outside of Somalia’s (UNDP/ICPAC, 2013). DLDD in Somalia: there are several
border. Approximately 30 percent reasons, including biophysical and
of the Juba River basin lies within socio-economic factors, for the erosion
Somalia, and only 25 percent of the Charcoal Production of soil and the subsequent degradation
Shabelle basin lies in Somalia. of land. In urban areas, the expansion
Charcoal production is one of most of town and village centres results in
Originating in the Ethiopian high- serious causes of land degradation the accelerated removal of tree and
lands, the Juba and Shabelle traverse in Somalia. Breakdown of state vegetation cover – primarily used for
the gently sloping terrain in Somalia. institutions in 1991, protracted firewood, shelter, and livestock fencing.
At its confluence with the Juba River, conflict, weakening of traditional In suburban areas, an added dimension
the Shabelle River basin is 297,000 systems, lack of alternative energy, and of agro-pastoralism also contributes
km2, of which two-thirds are in limited livelihoods have resulted in the to vegetation cover removal, but the
Ethiopia and the rest in Somalia. After unsustainable production, trade, and primary culprit of DLDD is gully
its confluence with the Shabelle, the use of charcoal. Forests and rangelands erosion. In suburban and rural areas,
Juba River flows downstream through have been cleared to provide raw the absence of a formal road network
to the Indian Ocean. However, due materials for charcoal production; results in the proliferation of alterna-
to climatic conditions throughout the the slow growing dry deciduous bush tive dirt roads and pathways.
Shabelle, extreme flooding and periods land and thicket species of Acacia and
of drought frequently affect the basin. Commiphora have been most affected In the outskirts of suburban centres,
This causes major problems to the (Federal Government of Somalia, and towards communal grazing land,
downstream communities in Somalia 2015). The cleared areas are hit by the land is used for pastoralism, and
(Mohamed, 2013). In these areas, mild flash floods during the rainy season, pastoralist activities are the primary
and frequent droughts occur, often livelihood source. While elements
followed by devastating floods (Roba et 2 In the western regions of Somaliland there are two rainy of urban pastoralism can be noted
seasons: Gu, which occurs between April and June, and Karan,
al., 2013; FAO SWALIM, 2009). which occurs from July to September. In the eastern regions, within urban centres (e.g. Hargeisa
there is the Gu season (April–June) and Dayr in September and and Garowe), overgrazing is considered
October. The two dry seasons occur between December and
more of a rural problem.
March (Jilaal) and July and August (Hagga).

--- Page 23 ---
23

--- Page 24 ---
24 SOMALIA NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMME FOR THE UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION TO COMBAT DESERTIFICATION
The primary drivers of 3.2 westwards towards Ethiopia in the
rainy season and return to grazing in
desertification, land CONSEQUENCES OF
the Bay and Bakool Regions during the
degradation, and DESERTIFICATION, dry season. Similarly, within Middle
Shabelle, the movements in and out
drought in Somalia
LAND of the Shabelle River are based on
can be attributed to seasonality.
DEGRADATION,
environmental and
AND DROUGHT Both severe droughts and extreme
biophysical causes as well flooding have been known to cause
ON NATURAL
deepened food insecurity as a result
as socio-economic patterns
of loss of livestock and food short-
RESOURCES
of land use ages (FAO SWALIM, 2009; ACAPS,
2011). However, the impacts of
As a consequence of a changing DLDD are often localized and differ
climate, combined with aspects both across ecological zones and within
of Somalia’s geomorphology and them. The explanation for the localized
topography, Somalia has a biophysical occurrences of DLDD in areas that
disposition that is prone to recurrent suffer from extreme floods and severe
droughts and severe flooding. Drought droughts lies in the intersection
affects all communities in Somalia: between biophysical states of land
the agro-pastoral communities in the degradation, the impacts DLDD has
woodlands of Bay, Bakool, Benadir, on natural resources, and the socio-
Gedo, and Hiraan Regions, as well as economic uses of land.
those in the arid and low-rainfall shrub
lands in Nugaal and Bari Regions. The primary drivers of DLDD in
These climatic variations create a Somalia can be attributed both to
metrological predetermined pattern of environmental and biophysical causes
seasonal migration. as well as socio-economic patterns of
land use. This section creates a link be-
While seasonal migrations are a part tween the biophysical causes of DLDD
of pastoralist patterns of subsistence (Section 3 of this document) and its
and trade, severe climatic variations socio-economic impacts (Section 4).
contribute to losses of livestock. This Here, the focus is on the impacts of
has been noted in the predominantly DLDD as it relates to resource units on
pastoralist-inhabited northern areas the surface and subsoil of land.
of the Golis mountain range in the
Waqooyi Galbeed, Togdheer, and
Bari Regions. Southwards in Bakool,
pastoralists and their livestock migrate

--- Page 25 ---
25
Figure 3.3: Types of Degradation and their Impact
Source: Compiled by NAP/ELD Technical Expert
Vegetation Cover percent is wooded grassland and only recorded for geographically and eco-
9 percent is rangeland. In the north, logically distinct areas in the northern
The land cover of the floodplains in 83 percent of the land cover consists and southern parts of Somalia, DLDD
southern Somalia is considered the of predominately rangeland vegetation trends are fairly similar.
most densely vegetated. Cultivated and parts where small portions of
areas and a smaller proportion of dense non-vegetation are prevalent (FAO Loss of topsoil, nutrient decline,
vegetation contribute to 74 percent SWALIM, 2009). Although clear and loss of vegetation cover (FAO
of its natural vegetation, of which 65 differences in vegetation cover can be SWALIM, 2009) are some of the

--- Page 26 ---
26 SOMALIA NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMME FOR THE UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION TO COMBAT DESERTIFICATION

--- Page 27 ---
27
environmental impacts of DLDD in cover loss. This results in misleading or ballis and berkads; groundwater
Somalia. Between 2003 and 2008, signals and indications of the underly- requires the construction of boreholes,
northern Somalia lost 8.5 percent of ing drivers of DLDD, pointing to shallow wells, and springs used for
its vegetation cover. The most affected grazing on rangelands as excessive water harvesting. The availability and
areas were those in which fuel wood without accounting for pasture that distribution of the different water
collection and livestock grazing are is increasingly encroached upon by sources is based on the topography,
intensively practiced (FAO SWALIM, unregulated urban expansion and the hydrogeology, and composition of
2009). In 2012, 59 percent of the construction of illegal enclosures in different ecosystems. For example,
predominantly pastoralist inhabitants communal grazing areas reserved for shallow wells are more abundant in
of the eastern part of the Hawd pastoralism. valleys such as Nugaal, Dharoor, and
plateau in the Togdheer, Sool, and Mudug (Roba et al., 2013), which
Sanag Regions reported complete loss Alternatively, vegetation cover removal receive less rainfall and are more arid.
of livestock, which forced them to can be measured as the opportunity
abandon their livelihoods and move to cost per unit of topsoil lost,3 account- Impacts of DLDD on water are related
towns (HAVOYOCO, 2012). ing for the benefits of reserving land to the management of seasonal rivers
and mitigating the effects of DLDD and the regulation of groundwater
It is in these areas that the complexity for sustainably managed communal sources. The absence of management
of the relationship between vegetation grazing and agro-pastoralism. What for seasonal river flows, soil erosion,
cover and livelihoods is most evident. could be measured are biophysical and tree felling along riverbanks lead to
Around 23 percent of the Somali causes (soil and water erosion caused erosion caused by water, improper rain-
population are rural and 26 percent by droughts and floods), direct land water collection practices, unregulated
engage in nomadic pastoralism uses (such as charcoal production urban expansion along riverbanks,
(UNFPA, 2014). Almost all rural and and grazing), and indirect uses of and a lack of urban drainage systems,
suburban dwellers engage in some land (e.g. urban expansion and illegal resulting in water pollution (Guleid et
form of agro-pastoralism, subsistence enclosures). The emphasis placed al., 2007).
agriculture, and charcoal production on measuring topsoil is critical for
as livelihood options. Pastoralism and understanding where degraded land
wood collection are the dominant is located and what has caused land Oil, Gas, and Minerals
land-use types, thus giving a strong degradation.
signal that the major drivers of land Somaliland and parts of Bay hold a
degradation in the country have been range of known mineral resources
overgrazing and loss of vegetation Groundwater and Surface such as coal, gypsum, limestone, and
(FAO SWALIM, 2009). Water quartz. Various gemstones as well as
precious and base metals such as gold,
However, while DLDD as a result of Water in Somalia can be classified copper, lead, and zinc are also known
excessive use of land is measured in as surface water and groundwater. to be present (Somaliland NDP, 2011;
terms of vegetation cover removed, Surface water is most often accessed Yergen, 2011). The World Bank and
the loss of land through agricultural through traditional communal warr the United Nations Development
expansion and urban sprawl does not Programme (UNDP) hydrocarbon
3 See Gudger and Barker (1993) on the theory of land
feature in calculations of vegetation degradation and ELD Initiative (2013) on accounting for land study carried out in 1991 indicated
degradation and ecosystem services.

--- Page 28 ---
28 SOMALIA NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMME FOR THE UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION TO COMBAT DESERTIFICATION
good potential for oil and gas deposits then combined with lay, mudstone, Similarly, recent oil and gas exploration
in northern Somalia (Balthasar, 2014; or shale (10–15 percent), and the activities in Oodweyene, Somaliland,
Farah et al., 2002; World Bank, 1980). remaining 5 percent is gypsum or raise a number of critical issues with re-
anhydrite (Hussein, 2013). These gard to the value of converting grazing
Artisanal mining for non-metallic raw materials are also used in brick land for oil and gas production. The
minerals (gemstones, salt, sepiolite, making, which is increasingly pursued overlap between traditional authority,
gypsum, and kaolin) is the primary as an alternative livelihood strategy local government, and central govern-
mineral production activity in Somalia (IRIN, 2007). Although the mining of ment jurisdiction further exacerbates
(Yager, 2011). Medium cement sand and limestone does result in the the challenges to the hydrocarbon
production is also prevalent in Berbera denudation of land, which contributes sector (OCVP, 2014). The implica-
at Suria Malable, north of Baardheere, to degradation (Hadley, 2014; Somalia tions of the exploration, extraction,
Bur Anole, Markabley, and at Jiiqleey, NBSAP, 2015), the scale of activities and transportation of hydrocarbon
south of Beledweyne on the Shabelle is such that the mining sector is not resources is discussed further under
River (Hussein, 2013). considered a direct threat to land. Section 4.3 on the conflict over access
Problems of access to and use of land to and use of land and its resources.
High-grade limestone (calcium lime- for mining versus grazing are problem-
stone) contributes to 80 to 90 percent atic in a socio-economic context rather
of cement production. Limestone is than an environmental one.

--- Page 29 ---
29
4. THE SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF
LAND DEGRADATION IN SOMALIA
Land and its resources are a develop- between regional officers and In Somalia the productivity
ment priority for the Somali people. central government
of land and its natural
Land features in the Somali Compact • To encourage people to find
and the currently evolving National good, suitable environments for resources was directly
Development Plan (NDP), Puntland settlements
linked to security and
Development Plan, and Pillars 1 and 4
of the Somaliland Development Plan. conflict resolution
The inability to respond adequately to 4.1 DEMOGRAPHICS
the cyclical drought–flood pattern is
AND CHANGING
damaging to land, livelihoods, and the
economy. A recurring concern from
LAND USE
stakeholder consultations pointed to
the need to link land-use management
to the development of the region, Factors contributing to urban sprawl,
particularly in pastoralist and agro- according to stakeholders consulted
pastoralist areas that are affected by during the NAP/ELD consultations,
severe droughts and flooding. were unemployment and disenfran-
chisement with the pastoralist way
In Somalia the productivity of land of life (particularly for youth). A
and its natural resources was directly recent International Organization for
linked to security and conflict resolu- Migration report on youth migration
tion. The key actions prioritized by in Somaliland and Puntland further
stakeholders during consultations were validates these findings (IOM, 2015).
the following:
• To improve peace and avoid Contrary to historical accounts of
conflict among people the population of Somalia being
• To resettle borders and identify 60 percent nomadic (UNEP, 2005;
rangelands, agricultural land for IUCN, 2006; WHO, 2010), the most
crop production, and forests recent Population Estimation Survey
• To protect against overgrazing, for Somalia (conducted in 2014)
desertification, and soil erosion reveals that the majority of Somalis (42
• To strengthen the connection percent) are urban dwellers; only 26

--- Page 30 ---
30 SOMALIA NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMME FOR THE UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION TO COMBAT DESERTIFICATION
percent are nomadic pastoralists, while
Figure 4.1: Population Estimates for Somalia 2014
23 percent make up the rural popula-
tion (Figure 4.1).
An understanding of the changes in
the demographic composition of the
Somali population is necessary to
put into context the socio-economic
impacts of DLDD.
Women, youth, and particularly
pastoralist nomads were identified
Source: UNFPA (2014)
as vulnerable groups. Stakeholders
identified nomadic herders as vulner-
able to drought, since it depletes their
most precious assets: their livestock access throughout the year (Killeh and a commonly noted phenomenon,
and pasture. Even in agricultural Awale, 2003; Academy for Peace and even in established cities such as
riverine areas, the effects of drought Development, 2002). Hargeisa and Garowe. In response to
are compounded; there are risk-prone changing land-use systems (increas-
communities in Middle and Lower While urbanization is not a problem ingly sedentary lifestyles, commercial
Shabelle and Middle and Lower Juba. per se, the complete absence of pastoralism, large-scale conversion of
This was evident in the period before urban planning for these settlements communal lands for agriculture) and
the onset of the 2014 El Niño (for a is problematic ecologically and land degradation, the need for herd
more detailed analysis, see Section 2.7 administratively. The obvious demand mobility to be incorporated into urban
of the 2013 Somalia NAPA). for economic transactions through and peri-urban adapted livelihood
urban centres has contributed to a forms has emerged as a coping strategy.
The increasing urban population phenomenon stakeholders refer to as This is in addition to growing demand
has accelerated the expansion of ‘mobile business camps’. According to for camel and goat milk and livestock
urban centres and contributed to the customary law in Puntland, the illegal sales with reduced transportation costs
proliferation of new villages and towns construction of such camps in the for the individual pastoralist unit.
at a rate of 5 to 8 percent per annum Nugaal Region is punishable by law.1
(Bruyas, 2006), with an increase in
requirements for sedentary land uses Growth of the urban population
that incorporate livestock production has also resulted in an urban–rural
and construction of permanent hybrid of land use, characterized by
settlements on land that was previously the prevalence of urban pastoralism.
communally held. This trend has been The practice of urban pastoralism is
traced to the introduction of berkads
1 Annex 6: Summary of Offences and Fines for Nugal Region,
and boreholes, which facilitate water
2013 NRM Customary Law, Puntland.

--- Page 31 ---
31
Women and children in 4.2 GENDER AND activities. Women-targeted training
and capacity-building measures should
rural areas are identified as DESERTIFICATION,
also be undertaken during the NAP
one of the most vulnerable LAND implementation.
groups in Somalia due
DEGRADATION,
to the adverse impacts
4.3 DEVELOPMENT
AND DROUGHT
of desertification, land
PLANNING AND
degradation, and drought Women and children in rural areas
DECENTRALIZED
are identified as one of the most
vulnerable groups in Somalia due to LOCAL
the adverse impacts of desertification,
GOVERNANCE
land degradation, and drought. Sexual
division of labour, unequal access
to both material and non-material A recent baseline survey con-
resources, and women’s diminished ducted by the Somaliland Ministry of
participation in decision making in Environment and Rural Development,
both political and private domains covering Awdal, Sahil, Togdheer,
further contribute to the vulnerability Maroode Jeex, and Sanaag Regions,
of women. In rural Somalia, women suggests that communities in the areas
usually undertake many household surveyed are largely dependent on
tasks, including collection of firewood forests and grazing reserves as their
and water and preparation of food for main source of energy, income, and
the family. These resources get scarce in fodder (Ministry of Environment and
degraded ecosystems and put more of Rural Development, 2014). Findings
a burden on women and girls as they of the survey highlight the dominance
attempt to fulfil their duties. of low-value species in all targeted
grazing and forest reserves in the survey
Mainstreaming gender issues in areas. Low nutritional range species
the NAP is essential and should and low economic value tree species are
lead to the recognition that women dominating ecosystems, while prefer-
have a significant role to play in able and valuable species are either
environmental decision-making endangered or extinct (Ministry of
processes. To address the impacts of Environment and Rural Development,
DLDD on women, sex-disaggregated 2014).
socio-economic data on the impacts of
DLDD should be collected to inform Similar results were echoed in the
decision making related to NAP ‘Your Environment, Your Life’ baseline

--- Page 32 ---
32 SOMALIA NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMME FOR THE UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION TO COMBAT DESERTIFICATION
survey commissioned by the Puntland to DLDD at the federal level, as Focusing on bridging the gap between
Ministry of Environment, Wildlife well as in Somaliland and Puntland. the periphery and the centre and
and Tourism. The study area covered Districts were considered the main providing information nearest to
the regions of Bari, Karkaar, Mudug, focal level of government, as they have where it is collected and utilized will
Sanaag, Nugaal, and Sool (Roba et access to populations through Village help strengthen reporting on land-use
al., 2013). Degradation of land and Development Committees and engage indicators, as well as wider joint
its natural resources is manifested in in preparing district natural resource programming with other Rio conven-
desertification, soil erosion, secondary management plans with the support of tions (see Section 5.1 for details).
salinization, and waterlogging and specialized ministries.
affects 70 percent of the landmass in
Puntland. District administrations strengthen- 4.4 CONFLICT
ing the understanding of causes of
Towards reversing land degradation, DLDD AND THE USE OF
decentralization continues to be a key
VIOLENCE
government policy across government • Awareness raising at village and
administrations. Since 2008, the community levels through Village
United Nations Joint Programme on Development Committees and The link between land use, environ-
Local Governance and Decentralized traditional elders as well as schools mental degradation, and conflict is
Service Delivery has been delivering • Advocacy for sustainable land an inevitable and well-documented
support to the reconstruction and management through community- reality in the Somali pastoralist way
development of Somalia. based organizations, with technical of life (Lewis, 1999; Unruh, 1995a).
support from specialized ministries Throughout the Somali region,
As part of local government efforts, and district departments rural land is communally owned and
annual District Development administered by traditional elders
Frameworks are revised by local District NRM planning (or through Village Development
government authorities and approved Committees).2 The government, as the
for funding and implementation. • Ministries working together and legal custodian of all natural resources,
These frameworks form the basis of the producing a consultative NRM provides services to regulate the use of
district planning process. In relation to plan endorsed by local government land.3 However, incidents of conflict
land-use planning and early warning, officials and the use of violence are often
stakeholders proposed the alignment • Local governments can take the resolved traditionally through councils
of DLDD-specific objectives under the lead in managing their resources of elders.
District Development Frameworks, and report back to the central level
given the close connection for national planning Clan territory forms the basic unit of
between land resources and Somali 2 For federal policy on decentralization, see Somalia Interim
Constitution and Somali Compact. For decentralization
development. Early warning and reporting on
structures by regions, see Somaliland Regions and District
land-use indicators Self-Administration Law No. 23/2002; Puntland District Self-
The Science and Technology Working Administration Law No. 07/2003.
3 According to the legal systems in Somaliland and Puntland
Group to the NAP consultations Monitoring and evaluation is notori- State, land is classified as either urban land or rural land. This
proposed the district-level approach ously weak in the Somali context. distinction is elaborated under Operational Objective 2: Policy
Framework of the Somali NAP.

--- Page 33 ---
33

--- Page 34 ---
34 SOMALIA NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMME FOR THE UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION TO COMBAT DESERTIFICATION
administration for the enforcement of and its resources results in overlapping degradation and conflict relates to the
rights of access and use of land and its claims to a diminishing resource base. administration of the land cadastral
resources. According to stakeholders In such situations, land degradation and the resolution of disputes over
who participated in consultations contributes to the duration and land tenure. In such cases, conflicts
and questionnaire respondents, the intensity of conflicts that could of interest are unlikely to escalate
most important role of clan leadership otherwise be resolved or prevented if into extreme and protracted violence.
is determining the development land was less degraded. Conflicting Most often, land tenure disputes are
of natural resources and regulating claims often arise when entitlements to settled by district courts or the Land
access to land and its resources. The the development and use of resources Dispute Tribunal, or through out-of-
breakdown of clan relations, increasing on the subsoil of land are appropriated court settlements by elders through
incidents of conflict over land, and the contrary to, or outside the scope of, traditional systems of governance.
duration and intensity of such conflicts previously established clan agreements Such conflicts include forced eviction,
were raised as a key indicator of the or customary law (xeer). issuance of duplicated title deeds/
socio-economic impacts of DLDD. official documents, or land grabbing.
The second link to conflict in relation
In Puntland, stakeholders reported that to land is in areas of ongoing violence It is important to note that the link
‘conflicts over water and rangelands and armed conflict where land degra- between conflict and land degradation
are common…for instance, in Bari dation is a feature of conflict dynamics. is a function of overall changes in
Region…there has been an ongoing This is most commonly found in parts the demographic and geopolitical
conflict between two subclans since of southern Somalia and in contested landscape of Somalia. As more rural
2008.’ The disputed area lies in the border areas. In these areas, violence communities, internally displaced per-
grasslands of the Dharoor valley, and the use of force occur as a result of sons, and returnees relocate to urban
which is also the site of the Africa Oil the political environment, rather than centres, the economic value of soil
drilling operation. Drought, famine, biophysical degradation of land and will increase as its ecological quality
and the promise of potential oil created its resources. The interface between continues to diminish. The differences
overlapping claims to land by Dubays political volatility and the biophysical in the causality of land to incidents of
(subclan of Warsangali) and Osman state of the environment manifests conflict will determine the value people
Mohamud (subclan of Majeerteen), on different scales. For example, attach to soil, and the costs they are
who are the predominant subclans in political rivalry and grazing rights willing to incur to enforce their right
that area (Beerdhige, 2012; Hoehne, escalate conflict between subclans in to access and use land, as well as their
2015). the contested border regions of Sool, perceptions of benefits from ecosystem
Sanaag, and Cayn between Somaliland services. In the Somali context, the
Somalia represents three distinct and Puntland. In southern Somalia, connection between land and conflict
typologies in which land degradation the felling of 4.375 million trees for is a series of transactions executed by
is a factor in conflict and the use of charcoal production has been linked to people, determined by the biophysical
violence. The first is where incidents revenues generated by the Al-Shabaab environment, and regulated by the
of conflict over land and access to terrorist group (Government of rules they enforce.
resources escalate into violence, such as Somalia/ UN, 2013).
the Bari Region example. In such cases, Throughout the NAP/ELD consulta-
the biophysical degradation of land The third link between land tions, there was general consensus that

--- Page 35 ---
35
Most often, land tenure the increasing number of conflicts the protection of soil and rehabilitation
is linked to desertification and land of rangeland was considered a govern-
disputes are settled by
degradation. However, drought was ment responsibility.
district courts or the considered the main factor in internal
displacement and migration towards In some situations, natural resource
Land Dispute Tribunal,
urban centres, rather than conflict. management interventions are
or through out-of-court Land users and district administrators introduced by the private sector or
in the conflict-prone Somaliland– non-governmental actors (mainly local
settlements by elders
Puntland border areas point to the NGOs, international NGOs, and UN
through traditional need to improve soil quality and land agencies; see the list of stakeholders
productivity to provide for the influx consulted for details) and adopted by
systems of governance
of migrants who flee into their districts communities. Such initiatives are small
for refuge. In more politically stable scale, few in number, and scattered
areas, the primary concern related to in spatial coverage, thus having no
securing access to communal grazing significant impact on reversing the
areas by destroying illegal enclosures. land degradation caused by widespread
sheet and gully erosion, which is preva-
The following sections present case lent in the northern areas of Somalia.
studies and examples gathered during The Ministries of Environment in
the NAP/ELD consultations that Puntland and Somaliland, through
capture stakeholder concerns as they support from SWALIM, have well-
relate to DLDD. documented studies on the location
of land degradation hotspots (Mumuli
Conflict over Access to and Njeru, 2015).
and Use of Land and Its
Gumburaha village in Baligubadli
Resources
District, Somaliland, was one of
the sites visited during the NAP/
According to questionnaire respon-
ELD consultations. The focus group
dents and consultations, the use
discussion with traditional elders in
of force was deemed an acceptable
Gumburaha provides a representative
strategy in the protection of communal
example of the value attached to
land. Stakeholder perceptions were
communal rights to grazing and the
that land held communally should be
constraint land degradation places on
utilized to derive communal benefits
the enforcement of overlapping claims
even if such benefits included the
to land. According to elders, the village
grazing, watering, and fencing of
of Gumburaha has experienced two
livestock that are privately owned by
years of drought, calculated from the
individuals within a wider pastoralist
last rain cycle in 2013 and two missed
unit. While the enforcement of rights
cycles of rain since. The situation can
was seen as a community responsibility,

--- Page 36 ---
36 SOMALIA NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMME FOR THE UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION TO COMBAT DESERTIFICATION
be described as a localized occurrence According to a recent baseline survey or otherwise, the different levels of
of drought, as the neighbouring plains on forest and range resources, the government (federal or state or district)
surrounding the village continue to increase of similar resource conflicts as have the overriding authority over the
receive rain. a result of the proliferation of private land and natural resources within their
enclosures on communal land is not respective territories. It is important to
During the NAP/ELD consultative uncommon (Ministry of Environment note that the regulatory regimes that
visit on 29 April 2015, elders described and Rural Development, 2014). It govern land are subject to the custom-
a recent conflict that arose among should be noted that stakeholders view ary rules5 and legislative laws that
members of their community that re- the issue of illegal enclosures as a threat govern the resources that lie on the
lates to a nearby grazing area. Over the to communal rights, and one that gives surface of land and in its subsoil. This
preceding months, an increase of illegal benefits from land to the individual applies to situations where members
enclosures had been noted. As illegal at the expense of the many. Thus, of one clan/subclan wish to construct
enclosures limit pastoralists’ access to the occurrence of conflict is a social a borehole on communal grazing land
grazing land and water resources, their sanction, and one that is imposed to over which they only have access rights
construction is considered a violation enforce communal rights, rather than to surface resources, and no rights
of Somali custom. To reclaim com- restrict individual access. of use for subsoil resources such as
munal land for the community, the groundwater. Similarly, oil and miner-
enclosures were destroyed. This sparked This example is repeated across regions als in the subsoil of land are subject
animosity between the community and and communities (OCVP, 2014). to both statutory laws of the central
the enclosure owners. In areas where there are overlapping government as well as the traditional
claims to land over different resource rules governing communal land under
As a result of the violence and the units – on the surface of land as which hydrocarbons are located.
costs associated with the removal of well as its subsoil – these have
enclosures, elders, through the Village led to intensified and protracted For this reason, stakeholders to the
Development Committee, called upon incidents of conflict. For example, the NAP/ELD consultations emphasize
local government officials and the predominantly pastoralist district of the need for a holistic approach to
Ministry of Environment and Rural Oodweyne in Togdheer is believed to land management, one that considers
Development district officer for as- hold oil reserves.4 Since the onset of land and the resources on its surface
sistance. The committee proposed the oil exploration efforts in June 2012, and subsoil and the administrative
destruction of all illegally constructed community protests and unrest in arrangements governing economic
enclosures on communal grazing land, the Oodweyne block prompted the activities within each ecological unit
and the formalized seasonal closure government to consider establishing (Figure 4.2).
of the rangeland to enable natural an Oil Protection Unit to safeguard oil
restocking and rehabilitation. While operations (Williamson, 2014).
any individual has the right to grow
5 In Puntland, the constitution recognizes and enshrines the
crops for food or fodder within their As the constitutional custodian of
traditional Somali norms and uses in Article 108 of the 2009
place of residence, on communal all land, whether communally held Puntland Constitution. In Somaliland, Part 2 of the 2001
Somaliland Constitution recognizes Somali custom under the
rangelands it is not acceptable to 4 Exploration rights within the Oodweyne block are allocated
legislative powers vested in the House of Elders, Article 57.
restrict access to or exclude others from as follows: Genel Energy (50 percent), in partnership with Jacka
Resources (30 percent) and Petrosoma (20 percent) (OCVP, 2014:
the use of any parcel of land.
3).

--- Page 37 ---
37
on humanitarian assistance. However,
Figure 4.2: Integrated and Holistic Approach to Land and Its
due to security concerns, humanitarian
Resources
organizations are unable to reach
affected populations (Humanitarian
Needs Assessment, 2014).
Displaced women are often their
household’s main income provider and
are most affected by the surge in prices
of basic commodities that accompany
periods of instability. According to
OCHA’s overview of the humanitar-
ian situation, people experiencing
acute food security crisis are found
in large numbers among displaced
people in Bari, Nugaal, south Mudug,
Galgaduud, Hiraan, Middle Shabelle,
Lower Shabelle, Bakool, Gedo, Middle
Juba, and Banadir Regions, and in
rural areas (Humanitarian Needs
Source: Compiled by NAP/ELD Technical Expert Assessment, 2014).
Stakeholders to the NAP/ELD
proposed some actions for reversing
Violence and the Use of displaced by internal conflict, there
land degradation in the face of the
Land have been over 20,000 Somali return-
deteriorating humanitarian situation in
ees fleeing conflict in Yemen to settle
areas that are particularly vulnerable to
in Mogadishu, Hargeisa, and Bossaso
According to most recent data on con- violent conflict. The recommendations
(Somalia Humanitarian Bulletin, June
flict in Somalia, as of 1 August 2015 focused on two levels: engagement at
2015).
there were 2,099 reported incidents the grass-roots level, and interventions
of violent death since the beginning at the policy and national planning
Recurrent drought as a result of
of the year 2015 (Armed Conflict level. These proceedings are sum-
missed cycles of rain has been the
Location and Event Data Project, marized below.
primary cause of food insecurity and
2015). The majority of these incidents
malnutrition. According to a food
were in south central Somalia in the Somali communities in areas of
security analysis of 2015, movement
regions of Hiiran, Lower Shabelle, violent conflict
restrictions due to instability in areas
Bay, and Bakool, with reports of 2,500
affected by military operations have
people displaced between May and • Strengthening neutral outreach by
caused disruptions to trade and
June 2015 (Somalia Humanitarian local civil society on DLDD
markets, creating further dependence
Bulletin, 2015: 3). In addition to those • Prioritizing decentralized natural

--- Page 38 ---
38 SOMALIA NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMME FOR THE UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION TO COMBAT DESERTIFICATION
Figure 4.3: Decentralized Natural Resource Management
Source: Adapted Excerpt from Somaliland 2014 NRM Sector Study
resource management service Policy and planning for DLDD in • Prioritizing sustainable land
delivery areas of violent/armed conflict management and land rehabilita-
• Focusing on technical sustainable tion among the first post-conflict
land management interventions at • Introducing sustainable land interventions
the grass-roots level management into camps for • Investing in improving soil quality,
• Utilizing existing governance internally displaced people and as food security is linked to soil
structures to introduce sustainable adjacent areas fertility
land management practices that • Mainstreaming environmental • Utilizing decentralized mecha-
are adapted to context planning into humanitarian nisms (Figure 4.3) for enforcement
operations of natural resource management
and DLDD policies

--- Page 39 ---
39
Conflict over Land Tenure • Conflicts between residents and their impact on land cover, ranging
and Dispute Settlement returnees from minor impacts to severe land
degradation. These causes were then
Somaliland (various urban areas) mapped according to three locations
One in eight land dispute cases relates
(urban centres, suburban areas, and
to overlapping claims to land and
• Overlapping claims to the same rural areas), which are marked by a
use of its surface resources and to
parcel of land by host community growing distance from any given town
residential land (UN-Habitat, 2015a).
and returnees centre. Stakeholder inputs were then
Administratively, such disputes over
• Conflicts between landlords adapted to von Thünen’s model on the
titles are different from those that
and tenants over private land/ locational theory of land. The findings
occur between resource users over
settlements are summarized in Figure 4.4.
communal land. Although disputes are
• Forcible eviction from public land
officially brought to the Land Dispute
• Issuance of duplicate legal docu- While land degradation affects the
Tribunal, the majority of cases are
ments over the same plot of land benefits land users may derive from
resolved through traditional channels
• Counterfeiting of land ownership land and its resources, it has limited
of dispute resolution (NRC/LAW,
documents implications on the tenure system
2014: 9 and 28).
in Somalia. The extent of the link
The prevalence of different between land administration and
The nature of land tenure disputes is
legal systems in Somalia makes the the management of land and its
often related to inheritance of land,
regulation of rights to land, title resources is when land disputes arise
gifting or donation of land, customary
over property, and access to secure over the validation of rights to land
acquisition or sale of land, demarcation
tenure particularly complex (Unruh, appropriated by customary law. This
of plots, and issues pertaining to title
1995b; Unruh, 2004). The changing is a common feature of Land Dispute
or ownership (NRC/LAW, 2014: 15;
demographic situation, increasing Tribunal case law and is often resolved
UN-Habitat, 2015a, 2015b). Across
disenfranchisement with the pastoralist by customary precedent. From the case
regions, urban land conflicts are
way of life, and demand for urban samples reviewed during the Somalia
similar (NRC/LAW, 2014: 16 and 34;
settlements all have implications on the NAP formulation process, a typical
Academy for Peace and Development,
use of land and the quality of soil. The land dispute scenario would draw
2010), with some variations among
primary environmental concern is the heavily on previous decisions of elders.6
urban centres (see below).
pressure on land as more returnees and
internally displaced people relocate to
Mogadishu
urban centres, as well as the increase in
land degradation that comes with the
• Forced eviction of internally
growing demands of a rapidly expand-
displaced people
ing urban population.
• Land grabbing
• Insecurity of tenure and abuses
During NAP/ELD consultations,
caused by gatekeepers of camps for
stakeholders were asked to list the
internally displaced people
• Conflicts between private land primary causes of land degradation 6 Republic of Somaliland, Maroodi-jeex Regional Committee for
and to rank these by intensity of Land Disputes, GGDH/MJ/7-14/G-124/2014 and GGDH/MJ/74-
owners and tenants
12/G-84/13.

--- Page 40 ---
40 SOMALIA NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMME FOR THE UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION TO COMBAT DESERTIFICATION
Figure 4.4: Desertification, Land Degradation, and Drought by Location and Distance from Urban Centres
Sources: Adapted by NAP/ELD Technical Expert- CiFOR LDSF (2013), von Thünen cited in Sinclair (1967)

--- Page 41 ---
41
5. SOMALIA NATIONAL ACTION
PROGRAMME PROCESS
5.1 SOMALI The UN Framework The Somalia NAPA focuses on three
Convention on Climate programme areas:
PRIORITIES
1. Sustainable land management
Change and the Somalia
UNDER THE RIO 2. Integrated water resource
National Adaptation
management
CONVENTION Programme of Action on 3. Disaster management
Climate Change
The Convention on
Joint planning and programming
for the implementation of the Rio The Somalia National Adaptation Biological Diversity and
Convention (a formal combination of Programme of Action on Climate the Somalia National
three conventions: the UN Framework Change (NAPA) points to biophysical Biodiversity Strategy and
Convention on Climate Change, the and metrological factors contributing
Action Plan
Convention on Biological Diversity, to severe drought events and flooding.
and the UN Convention to Combat Land degradation forms an integral
Desertification or UNCCD) and the part of climate change problems identi- The Somalia National Biodiversity
post-2015 agenda was a key feature of fied during the NAPA consultations in Strategy and Action Plan (NBSAP)
discussions during the Somalia NAP 2013. Some of the impacts of climate presents the Somalia Vision 2050
planning process and consultations. change (mainly extreme variations in for biodiversity, in which the Somali
Efforts were made to link pre-existing climate) associated with land degrada- people envision that by 2050 their
climate change adaptation and mitiga- tion were the following: damage to biodiversity is restored, conserved, and
tion plans (mainly early warning on land, gullying, soil erosion, loss of soil used sustainably. The ecosystem-based
floods and drought) with the underly- fertility, loss of existing water supply approach under the convention, which
ing causes of DLDD, in addition to schemes, and damage to infrastructure. calls for the integrated management
linking the Somalia NAP with the The NAPA provides a comprehensive of land, water, and living resources,
need for institutional capacity develop- account of rainfall variability and provides a strong linkage for the joint
ment across environment ministries presents climate change projections, implementation of the NBSAP and
and parliamentary committees in the which were previously unavailable for NAP. The NBSAP sets out national
respective regions. Somalia. biodiversity goals and objectives, 9
overarching principles, and 15 strategic
approaches that will guide the 5 main
priority areas of the NBSAP:

--- Page 42 ---
42 SOMALIA NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMME FOR THE UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION TO COMBAT DESERTIFICATION
1. Awareness and an inter-sectoral sustainable land management prac- 5.2 SUSTAINABLE
approach to biodiversity and tices with integrated water resources
DEVELOPMENT
development planning management concepts and interven-
2. Promotion of conservation and the tions, proposing efforts towards land GOALS AND
sustainable use of biodiversity degradation neutrality that consider
3. Safeguarding ecosystems, species, the management of land (specifically THE SOMALIA
and genetic diversity in Somalia topsoil) as it relates to access to and use
NATIONAL ACTION
4. Enhancing benefits from ecosys- of overlapping resource units (Figure
tems services, with an emphasis on 5.1). PROGRAMME
marginalized groups
5. Participatory planning, knowledge The Somalia NAP adapts an under-
In September 2015, the UN Summit
management, and capacity standing of the Somali connection to
in New York launched the new
building for conservation and land to stakeholder recommendations.
Sustainable Development Goals. The
sustainable biodiversity use The proposed NAP priorities are
17 goals set the international agenda
aligned with the UNCCD Ten-Year
on the environment, social change,
Strategy and clustered into three
and economic development for the
The UN Convention to programme areas:
next 15 years. Goal 15 urges countries
Combat Desertification 1. Integrated land and water
to protect, restore, and promote
management
and the Somalia National
the sustainable use of terrestrial
2. Access and rights to communal
Action Programme ecosystems, sustainably manage forests,
land
combat desertification, halt and reverse
3. Zoning and urban land use
The NAP/ELD consultations, held land degradation, and halt biodiversity
from April 2015 to February 2016, loss. Target 15.3 aims to ‘combat
made evident the need for an inte-
grated and holistic approach to DLDD
in the Somali region, considering the
Figure 5.1: Land Resources
variation in regional administrative
systems, the transboundary patterns of
resource use, and the shared ecological
units (e.g. mountain ranges and river
basins).
As a result, activities set out in the
Somalia NAP 2015–2030 consider
the concurrent access to and use of
resources that characterize land use in
Somalia. The conceptual framework
set out in the introductory section
is adapted to activities that combine

--- Page 43 ---
43
The Somalia National desertification, restore degraded land challenges in the report. Among the
and soil, including land affected by key recommendations of the report
Action Plan adapts an
desertification, drought and floods, and was the implementation of sustainable
understanding of the strive to achieve a land degradation– land management projects to build
neutral world’ by 2030. Somalia has the resilience of rural livelihoods and
Somali connection to
officially launched the domestication contribute to national food security.
land to stakeholder of the Sustainable Development Goals Achieving land degradation neutrality
into National Development Plans and through sustainable land management
recommendations
policies for better implementation and and rehabilitation of degraded lands
monitoring. Special consideration has will enhance the role of land and soil
been made to incorporate the goals in carbon sequestration and deliver
into the Somalia NAP to contribute to on the Paris Agreement (the Paris
achieving land degradation neutrality climate accord), to which Somalia is a
and also to facilitate future linkages in signatory.
planning and programming.
5.4 SOMALIA
5.3 INTENDED
NATIONAL ACTION
NATIONALLY
PROGRAMME
DETERMINED
SPECIAL
CONTRIBUTIONS,
CONSIDERATIONS
THE PARIS
AGREEMENT, AND New and Emerging States
THE SOMALIA
The political and administrative situa-
NATIONAL ACTION tion in Somalia is evolving, and there
is increased demand from stakeholders
PROGRAMME for more comprehensive subnational
and regional engagement. Apart from
the existing states of Puntland and
Somalia submitted its first Intended
Somaliland, other regional states have
Nationally Determined Contributions
emerged in the south central regions of
report to the UN Framework
Somalia. The interim administrations
Convention on Climate Change
of Jubaland, South-West, Galmudug,
secretariat in November 2015. Land
and Hirshabelle States were recently
degradation, droughts, and flash floods
formed.
were identified as major environmental

--- Page 44 ---
44 SOMALIA NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMME FOR THE UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION TO COMBAT DESERTIFICATION
Land-use issues are at the forefront of Efforts towards DLDD and wider productivity (Ministry of Environment
the political dialogue about the borders environmental resilience need to be and Rural Development, 2014), as
of the new and emerging states, as well embedded in the local context, through it provides livelihood diversification
as the border area between Somaliland decentralized branches of the executive options for poor and low-income
and Puntland. As clans continue to and legislature, supporting both families.
coexist and utilize natural resources policymaking and policy enforcement
that straddle administrative regions, at the grass-roots level.
the need emphasized by stakeholders Local Government and
in the NAP consultations for an the Role of Elders
integrated and holistic approach to The Pastoralist Way of
natural resource management becomes Life
The enforcement of rights of access to
increasingly evident.
and use of natural resources continues
Pastoralism continues to be one of to be one of the primary functions of
the predominant livelihood strategies. traditional elders. Land disputes are
Instability and Ongoing
Despite disenfranchisement with the often referred to traditional elders for
Conflict
pastoralist way of life, the Somali resolution in the event of a failure to
economies continue to rely on resolve disputes through the formal
Throughout 2015, there has been an livestock production for 30 percent of district courts. As the case study in
upsurge in conflict and acts of violence, the collective gross domestic product Section 3.3 of this NAP demonstrates,
particularly towards the international and more than 50 percent of foreign these traditional systems of governance
community. This reinforces the need exchange earnings (World Bank, form the cornerstone of access to
to enable local governments and 2014). justice and need to be strengthened.
strengthen civil society. Effectiveness of
international support for DLDD can Livestock husbandry was also reported
only be recognized at the local level, as a key coping mechanism for com-
through local stakeholders. munities in areas of low agricultural

--- Page 45 ---
45
6. SOMALIA NATIONAL ACTION
PROGRAMME 2015–2030: TOWARDS
LAND DEGRADATION NEUTRALITY
6.1 PROGRAMME aligned with Operational Objectives 1, measures for the rehabilitation of
2.1, 3, and 4.1 of the Somalia NAP. communal land. Activities are aligned
AREAS
with Operational Objectives 1, 2, 4.2,
Programme Area 2: Zoning and and 5.3 of the Somali NAP.
The programme areas that constitute Urban Land Use focuses of the
the Somalia NAP target the three economic and productive uses of
components (ecological, economic, land and its resources, with the aim 6.2 NATIONAL
and administrative) of the Somali of establishing a zonal system that
ACTION
connection to land. Each programme distributes land uses on the basis of soil
area represents a biophysical and suitability and the productive capacity
PROGRAMME
socio-economic focus that targets the of the land. Programmatic focus under
reversal of desertification and land this programme area should include ALIGNMENT
degradation and mitigates the effects of institutionalizing an understanding of
TO THE UN
drought (Figure 6.1). different and geographically adapted
livelihoods across agro-ecological
CONVENTION
Activities under each programme area zones. Activities in this programme
are linked to the NAP Implementation area are aligned with Operational TO COMBAT
Matrix (Section 6.3 of this document) Objectives 2.2, 2.3, 3, 4.2, and 5 of the
DESERTIFICATION
and aligned to the UNCCD opera- Somalia NAP.
tional objectives. Each programme area TEN-YEAR
has a specific focus: Programme Area 3: Access and
Rights to Communal Land has an STRATEGY
Programme Area 1: Integrated administrative focus with the aim of
Land and Water Management has clarifying the delineation and enforce-
The gaps in the available baseline data
an ecological focus. The choice of ment of the rights to access and use
necessitate that the immediate and
programme unit of analysis will be land and its resources. In Somaliland,
strategic activity for the alignment of
ecological, i.e. a watershed, catchment this follows the recommendations from
the NAP with the UNCCD Ten-year
area, agro-ecological zone, or resource the Burao conference held in April
Strategy is the development of bio-
unit such as rangeland or forest area. 2015. The aim is to secure communal
physical and socio-economic baselines.
Activities in this programme area are access for pastoralists and institute

--- Page 46 ---
46 SOMALIA NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMME FOR THE UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION TO COMBAT DESERTIFICATION
Figure 6.1: National Action Programme Areas
Source: NAP/ELD technical expert
Somali Strategic Strategic Objective Two: Improve the Strategic Objective Four: Effective
Objectives for the UN condition of affected ecosystems partnerships though UNCCD
implementation
Convention to Combat
• Biophysical baselines conducted
Desertification
in accordance with Operational Activities under Operational Objective
Objective 3 5 of the Somalia NAP implementation
Strategic Objective One: Improve
• National coordination to ensure schedule
living conditions of the affected
consistency of tools for baseline
populations
• Seasonal biophysical baselines to
aid in mapping livestock migration Somali Operational
• Socio-economic baselines con-
and transboundary resource use Objectives for the UN
ducted systematically throughout
Convention to Combat
administrations and regions Strategic Objective Three: Generate
Desertification
• Economics of land degradation global benefits through the effective
approaches adopted to understand implementation of the UNCCD
the socio-economic impacts of Operational Objective 1: Advocacy,
DLDD in Somalia Awareness Raising and Education
Somalia NAP implementation aligned
• Engage with district authorities to
with Somalia’s international commit-
adapt the Somalia NAP to District The activities proposed for advocacy
ments and national plans
Development Frameworks and public awareness favoured the
dissemination of public messages

--- Page 47 ---
47

--- Page 48 ---
48 SOMALIA NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMME FOR THE UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION TO COMBAT DESERTIFICATION
that emphasized instilling a sense of unsustainable land use, with an Climatic changes and
responsibility towards addressing land emphasis on people’s responsibil-
diminishing biological
degradation. Stakeholders prioritized ity to protect the environment
the need for customized messages to and land resources. This can diversity featured as critical
target different audiences: individuals, be achieved through weekly or
issues contributing to land
communities, and the private sector, bimonthly radio broadcasts and
as well as a nationwide government debates, bringing together land degradation
message on combatting desertification users and government policymak-
and mitigating the effects of drought. ers under the same public forum.
The aim is to infuse the Somali
The stakeholders identified education connection to land with a
as being among the key priorities in strengthened sense of responsibil-
addressing DLDD issues in Somalia. ity towards the prevention of land
This would include incorporating degradation.
environmental education into the • Second-track Informed Land-use
national curriculum, introducing Decisions: This activity aims at
environmental courses at the universi- disseminating facts and strategies
ties, engaging students in advocacy on what causes land degradation
and awareness raising, and promoting and how to mitigate it. This can
research to inform decision making. be achieved through publicly
available and widely disseminated
Climatic changes and diminishing information that will enable
biological diversity also featured as land users to make informed
critical issues contributing to land and environmentally sound
degradation. The stakeholders con- land-use decisions. The aim is to
sulted provided input to inform a dual enable land users to mitigate land
communications strategy: focusing degradation and the effects of
on legal enforcement of land-use drought.
regulations, particularly those securing
communal access, as well as emphasiz-
Operational Objective 2: Policy
ing messages on how to maximize
Framework
socio-economic gains from sustainable
land-use management.
There are no land-use policies to create
an enabling environment to combat
• First-track Social Mobilization:
land degradation and mitigate the
Nationwide public messages
effects of DLDD at the federal level or
covering the environmental aspects
at regional levels, with the exception
of land degradation as they
of Somaliland and Puntland, which
relate to soil productivity and the
have urban land management laws
socio-economic implications of
and other related laws. The need to

--- Page 49 ---
49
Table 6.1: Objective 1 – Baseline, Outcomes, and Institutional Commitments/Responsibilities
Objective 1: Advocacy, Awareness Raising, and Education
Baseline Federal Government of Somalia level Scattered efforts; no clear continuity
Puntland Ministry of Environment, Wildlife and Tourism–
led advocacy through NGOs
Somaliland Active civil society and small-scale advocacy
Interim South-West Administration No activities reported in region
Interim Juba Administration No activities reported in region
Interim Galmudug Administration No activities reported in region
Interim Hirshabelle Administration No activities reported in region
Outcomes 1.1 Communications Strategy
1.2 National Awareness Campaigns
Institutional Commitments/ Organization Role
Responsibilities Central environment and natural resource Design strategy and fundraising
ministries
Universities, NGOs, and private sector
International community Provide technical and financial support
formulate national land-use policy dualistic system of land classification. The regulation and management of
came out strongly in the stakeholder Urban land falls within the jurisdiction rural land use is more complex, both in
consultations. The stakeholders further of the Ministry of Public Works terms of applicable law and administra-
suggested the revival of forestry, and is regulated by the Urban Land tive enforcement. The legislative scope
rangelands, and game warden institu- Management Law No. 17/2001 of land considers land a productive
tions at district, regional, and national in Somaliland and Urban Land resource unit in terms of the resources
levels. Management Law 2008 in Puntland. that lie on its surface (pasture, vegeta-
Urban land management is decentral- tion cover, and soil)4 and within its
The policy framework in Somaliland ized to local government levels on subsoil (groundwater; similar infer-
and Puntland makes a clear distinction issues relating to temporary and ences can be drawn for access to land
between urban land and rural land. permanent land allocation,1 registra- for hydrocarbon resources),5 as an
However, the geographic and spatial tion of plots,2 land dispute resolution.3 ecological asset to be managed (land
delineation of urban and rural land overlaying watersheds, deforestation
is less well defined in practice. All
1 Article 10(1) and Article 14(1), Urban Land Management Law 4 Article 7 and Article 9, Environment Conservation and
statutory procedures relating to access
No. 17/2001. Proclamation Act No. 4/1998, Environment and Pastoral
to and use of land are subject to this 2 Article 27, Urban Land Management Law No. 17/ 2001. development Strategic Plan 2011–2015.
3 Article 28, Urban Land Management Law No. 17/ 2001. 5 Article 75, Somaliland National Water Act 2004.

--- Page 50 ---
50 SOMALIA NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMME FOR THE UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION TO COMBAT DESERTIFICATION
of catchment areas)6 and its biological traditional structures and local collaborate with local government
diversity protected.7 government devolved to the district authorities in delivering natural
level. Within clan/subclan boundaries, resource management services at village
In terms of administration of land traditional elders function as adminis- and district levels. A comprehensive
and the regulation of ecosystem trative units for the regulation of access account of inter-ministerial coordina-
services derived from land, the primary to and use of communal land. District tion for natural resource management
units of enforcement are customary/ borders represent the formalized spatial in Somaliland and Puntland is
units of government service delivery. provided in the 2014 Natural Resource
6 Somaliland National Policy on Environment.
7 Section I(B)(a), Somaliland National Policy on Environment The devolved government agencies Management Sector Studies, but there
2011; Pillar 5 of Somaliland Vision 2030.
Table 6.2: Objective 2 – Baseline, Outcomes, and Institutional Commitments/Responsibilities
Objective 2: Policy Framework
Baseline Federal Government of Somalia level The policies, regulatory frameworks, and
institutions to address DLDD are either weak or
non-existent
Puntland Light/none in Bari; strong/medium coast
degradation in Nugaal
Somaliland Strong/moderate degradation; none in Gacan
Libaax
Interim South-West Administration Strong/moderate degradation in Bay, Lower
Shabelle
Interim Juba Administration Strong degradation in Gedo, with light/none in
Juba
Interim Galmudug Administration Light/moderate degradation in Mudug/Galgadug
Interim Hirshabelle Administration Light/moderate degradation in Middle Shabelle/
Hiraan
Outcomes 2.1 Rangeland reserves demarcated, illegal enclosures removed
2.2 Measures for urban sprawl control and land-use planning
2.3 Access to land and resources for internally displaced people
Institutional Commitments/ Organization Role
Responsibilities Parliamentary committees Facilitate consultations, policy design and
Specialized ministries and agencies enforcement
Elders and Village Development
Committees

--- Page 51 ---
51
Table 6.3: Objective 3 – Baseline, Outcomes, and Institutional Commitments/Responsibilities
Objective 3: Science, Technology, and Knowledge
Baseline Federal Government of Somalia level Early warning and inter-agency coordination
Puntland for information management: data on rainfall
variability, flooding, food security, and nutrition
Somaliland
Interim South-West Administration No formal structures in DLDD at the state level.
Interim Juba Administration The environmental institutions in these newly
formed states are at their infancy stages.
Interim Galmudug Administration
Interim Hirshabelle Administration
Outcomes 3.1 Seasonally disaggregated data on vegetation cover
3.2 Early warning for areas at risk of drought and desertification
3.3 Appropriate technology adopted for removal of invasive species
3.4 Incorporation of tools for traditional knowledge management
3.5 Harmonized tools for coordination at national/subnational levels
Institutional Commitments/ Organization Role
Responsibilities Central environment and natural resource Facilitate consultations, policy design and
ministries enforcement
Disaster management agencies – SODMA,
NERAD, HADMA
Disaster Risk Coordination Committee – Standardization of tools
UN-Habitat
are no coordination mechanisms for solutions to combat desertification/ 2 on the policy framework and its
such management in other regional land degradation and mitigate the enforcement. This is not the case in the
states or at the federal level. effects of drought must be supported other regional states and at the federal
by the unique approach to land-use level, and hence there is a need to
At the core of land-use management management adopted traditionally and further sensitize and engage the respec-
and the urban–rural land dichotomy is administratively. tive Parliamentary Committees on
the coexistence of customary and statu- Environment and Natural Resources.
tory administrations for the governance In both Somaliland and Puntland, the
of land. When overlapping claims role of the respective Parliamentary Operational Objective 3: Science,
to land escalate into conflict, tradi- Committees on Environment and Technology, and Knowledge
tional systems of dispute resolution are Natural Resources were seen as playing
engaged to enable dispute settlement. a critical role in bringing together Across the regional consultations,
To be effectively implemented, Objective 1 on advocacy and Objective there was general agreement and

--- Page 52 ---
52 SOMALIA NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMME FOR THE UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION TO COMBAT DESERTIFICATION
emphasis among stakeholders that Similarly, in Puntland stakeholders 3. The Juba Valley
the current information available presented four agro-ecological zones • Pastoralism
on DLDD is neither sufficient nor and their prevalent land and resource • Extensive farming
reliable. Coordination efforts to gather uses.
and present data relevant to DLDD All three agro-ecological zones have a
were considered a priority activity. In 1. Dharoor Valley Zone coastal zone attached to them in which
particular, information on seasonal • Pastoralism fishing is practised, but this is not fully
variations and livestock migrations was • Frankincense exploited.
seen as critical for early warning on • Timber production
drought and food security. • Fodder Traditional elders, backed by the
• Agriculture specialized ministries, emphasized
Participants highlighted sites and the need to develop systems for
ecological zones that are representative 2. Nugaal Valley Zone gathering and disseminating traditional
of the major ecosystems. Emphasis was • Pastoralism knowledge. The role of the elders in
placed on information gaps and the • Agriculture local government was described (see
need for standardized and tabulated information box), and government
data, in addition to mapping. The 3. Hawd Zone officials agreed on the importance of
focus on agro-ecological zones was • Pastoralist traditional knowledge in decentralized
linked directly to the use of land and • Farming service delivery and early warning.
its resources. This is a common feature
of the Somali connection to land. It 4. Deex/coastal Zone Operational Objective 4: Capacity
presents a holistic view of land and • Pastoralism Building
its resources – both on the surface • Mangroves
of land and in its subsoil (Figure 2.1 • Farming Consultations on the DLDD
and 3.4). This holistic approach is capacity-building needs were priori-
also considered critical with regard to In the south central regions of the tized based on the respective National
groundwater retention and the regional country, there are three major agro- Development Plans in each region of
hydrologic balance across the five river ecological zones, and the predominant consultation. These national docu-
basins in Somalia that affect seasonal land and resource uses are as follows: ments included the Somali Compact
land use and soil quality. (Federal Government of Somalia),
1. The central plateau with broad the Puntland Five-year Development
In Somaliland, the proposed ecological limestone/sandstone Plan 2014–2018, and Somaliland
sites were based on prevalent land-use • Pastoralism Vision 2030. Stakeholders ranked each
practices across four agro-ecological • Limited farming development priority and identified
zones: activities for the Somali NAP.
1. Coastal Zone and Guban 2. The Shebelle Basin
2. Golis Mountains (Ogo Plain) • Pastoralism The Somali Compact was considered
3. Hawd Plateau • Extensive farming the main development point of
4. Nugaal Valley reference, primarily Peace and

--- Page 53 ---
53
Figure 6.2: Stakeholder-identified Agro-ecological Zones by Land Use
Source: Somaliland NAP/ELD Consultative Workshop May, 2015
Traditional Knowledge and the Role of Elders
Within a given clan/subclan unit, a group of elders is nominated to form a committee. This committee serves to assign clan
delegates to explore the quality of pasture from one place to another and relay the information back to the pastoralist unit.
Based on this information, the clan elders would advise the clan/subclan of the recommended transhumant migration
route. In addition to providing information on grazing locations, clan elders are key in regulating the types of trees, plants,
pasturelands, and vegetation cover permitted for grazing or general use.* This system of land-use management is aided
by traditional knowledge of the nutrients derived from particular plants and of herbal medicine, as well as experience on
seasonality and so on.
* The Environment Conservation Act and Proclamation No. 4/1998 substantiates some of the regulations that apply in custom. Article 1 provides a list of permitted tree species that are subject to prior
authorization by the Ministry of Environment and Rural Development. Article 2 provides a list of trees that are prohibited for general use.

--- Page 54 ---
54 SOMALIA NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMME FOR THE UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION TO COMBAT DESERTIFICATION
Table 6.4: Objective 4 – Baseline, Outcomes, and Institutional Commitments/Responsibilities
Objective 4: Capacity Needs
Baseline Federal Government of Somalia level Mogadishu-level capacity; limited decentralized
capacity
Puntland Ministry of Environment, Wildlife and Tourism
capacity; limited inter-ministerial linkages for
DLDD
Somaliland Moderate institutional capacity at centre; limited
district capacity
Interim South-West Administration Immediate capacity required for food production
and water provision
Interim Juba Administration Immediate capacity needed across ministries in
Kismayo
Interim Galmudug Administration Immediate capacity needed across ministries at
Adado
Interim Hirshabelle Administration Immediate capacity needed across ministries at
Adado
Outcomes 4.1 Capacity to formulate and enforce policy measures
4.2 Consultative land-use planning and decentralized service delivery
4.3 Measuring progress and reporting on indicators and multilateral environmental agreement
requirements
Institutional Commitments/ Organization Role
Responsibilities Central Ministries of Environment Lead NAP formulation/validation
UNDP National capacity needs self-assessment
Parliamentary committees Link between centre and communities
Formulate decentralized laws
State-building Goal 4 on Economic 2) Infrastructure Development Pillar: 2. Security Sector
Foundations. Transportation, Energy Production, 3. Justice Sector
and Water Supply. 4. Social Sector
In Somaliland, the Somaliland Vision 5. Livelihoods Sector
2030 Pillars were used as the basis for The Puntland Five-year Development 6. Infrastructure Sector
stakeholder priorities: 1) Economic Plan 2014–2018 sets out six sector
Development Pillar: Agriculture, Trade priorities: In addition, the plan has cross-cutting
and Financial Services, and Mining; 1. Governance Sector thematic priority areas: a) Establishing

--- Page 55 ---
55
Table 6.5: Objective 5 – Baseline, Outcomes, and Institutional Commitments/Responsibilities
Objective 4: Financing and Technology Transfer
Baseline Federal Government of Somalia level Donor trust funds – implementation varies
according to security situation
Puntland NGO programme–based funding; limited
institutionalization
Somaliland Project-based funding and small-scale
technology transfer
Interim South-West Administration Scattered projects by national and international
Interim Juba Administration partners; no systematic DLDD financing and
technology transfer
Interim Galmudug Administration
Interim Hirshabelle Administration
Outcomes 5.1 Integrated investment frameworks for multilateral environmental agreements at
subnational levels
5.2 Promoting efforts to mobilize funds from international funding mechanisms
5.3 Village Development Committees to prepare own projects
Institutional Commitments/ Organization Role
Responsibilities Central Ministries of Environment, Finance/ Macroeconomic framework for resource
Commerce mobilization
ELD Initiative, UNDP, and World Bank Economic and livelihood assessments/support
Federal Government of Somalia and Approach Kuwait Fund and Islamic Bank
UNCCD focal points
and Strengthening the Economic identified specific DLDD activities and Throughout the NAP consultations,
Foundation for Accelerated Sustainable capacity needs that target development capacity development for monitoring
Growth b) Effective and Responsive sectors according to the Puntland and reporting on environmental
Service Delivery, c) Accountable and Five-year Development Plan, including indicators was prioritized as a
Transparent Governance, d) Ruling the following: capacity need across the regions,
Justly, and e) Maintaining Peace and 1. Environmental governance particularly at decentralized district
Stability. 2. Customary dispute resolution levels. Furthermore, the capacity
3. Green job creation to formulate and enforce laws and
Out of the sector priorities and 4. Agricultural land development policies, particularly those on illegal
thematic priority areas, NAP consulta- 5. Infrastructure and urban sprawl enclosures, rangeland reserves, and
tions with stakeholders in Garowe natural resource management, were

--- Page 56 ---
56 SOMALIA NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMME FOR THE UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION TO COMBAT DESERTIFICATION
also prioritized. Traditional elders and responsibility of all stakeholders – Throughout the NAP
Village Development Committees were including subnational governments,
consultations, capacity
seen as the primary target groups, with local communities, and the diaspora.
support from specialized ministries development for
and Parliamentary Committees on
monitoring and reporting
Environment and Natural Resources. 6.3 SOMALIA
on environmental
Operational Objective 5: Financing NATIONAL ACTION
indicators was prioritized
and Technology Transfer
PROGRAMME
The DLDD financial diagnosis by IMPLEMENTATION
stakeholders yielded promising results.
Participants in the consultative work-
Consistent with the Somalia
shops were asked to identify current
development plans and aligned with
sources of financial support for DLDD
the UNCCD Ten-year Strategy,
activities. In Somaliland, emphasis was
stakeholders identified activities
placed on immediate efforts towards
targeting the Somali NAP strategic and
changing individual habits of resource
operational objectives. These proceed-
use. Financial support for ecological
ings are tabulated in Table 6.6.
literacy (ecoliteracy) is seen as the

--- Page 57 ---
57
Table 6.6: National Action Programme Implementation Plan (Matrix of Activities)
Operational Objectives Time Indicators Linkages
OPERATIONAL OBJECTIVE 1: ADVOCACY, AWARENESS RAISING, AND EDUCATION
Outcome 1.1: Communications strategy
Compiling an inter-ministerial communication 2018 Three national strategies (Somaliland, Puntland, NAPA
strategy Federal Government of Somalia) with regional
Media and academia to design key messages input prepared, validated, and activated NBSAP ST 1.5
Traditional elders leading community message SDGs Goal 15
development
Outcome 1.2: National awareness campaigns
Nationwide public messages: weekly/bi-monthly 2018 Ten hours of weekly airtime NBSAP ST 1.5
radio/TV broadcasts
Dissemination of scientific information on land- Information accessed at the village level
use decisions
Ecoliteracy mainstreamed into formal and 100 teachers, 20 in each zone trained NBSAP ST 1.6
vocational curricula
OPERATIONAL OBJECTIVE 2: POLICY FRAMEWORK
Outcome 2.1: Rangeland reserves demarcated, illegal enclosures removed
Districts apprise Ministry of Environment and 2020 Percentage of rangelands demarcated/ NBSAP ST 12
Ministry of Planning of demarcation proposals degazetted
Removal of all illegal enclosures Number of illegal enclosures removed
Measures to compensate for loss as a result of Alternative livelihood/compensation
enclosure removal
Outcome 2.2: Measures for urban sprawl control and land-use planning
Existence and implementation of a national urban 2018 Zoning system based on land use and SDGs Goal
land-use policy ecological zones 11.7
Instituting controls to contain urban sprawl and NBSAP ST 2, 15
DLDD impact
Outcome 2.3: Access to land and resources for internally displaced people
Securing land for those displaced by conflict or 2020 Documented/recognized tenure SDGs Goals
natural disasters 1, 15.1,
Natural resource management service delivery to Administrative arrangements for internally 16
vulnerable groups of internally displaced persons displaced people
in disaster-prone areas
DLDD livelihood support to vulnerable groups Losses by climate/non-climate disasters NAPA PA 1
SDGs Indicator 6 SDGs Goal 1

--- Page 58 ---
58 SOMALIA NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMME FOR THE UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION TO COMBAT DESERTIFICATION
OPERATIONAL OBJECTIVE 3: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY, AND KNOWLEDGE
Outcome 3.1: Seasonally disaggregated data on vegetation cover
Instituting measures to collect, disaggregate, and 2020 Seasonality feature of information NAPA PA 1, 2
provide seasonal data management and mapping tools
Land cover changes monitored by seasonality
Outcome 3.2 Early warning for areas at risk of drought and desertification
Continuous monitoring of changes to the 2020 Deforestation and ecosystem monitors in early NBSAP ST 7.2
ecosystem warning/disaster risk management
Monitoring charcoal-based deforestation NAPA PA 3
Rapid mobilization of mitigation measures for Area covered with drought-resistant crops
long-term adaptation
Outcome 3.3: Appropriate technology adopted for removal of invasive species
Management plan for Prosopis juliflora and 2018 Prosopis juliflora/invasive species expansion SDGs Goal
Leucaena leucocephala removal and prevention arrested by 60 percent by 2027 15.8
Alternative uses promoted by 2020 2020 NBSAP ST 9
Land-use plans account for Prosopis juliflora
management
Outcome 3.4: Incorporation of tools for traditional knowledge management
Participatory methods for collecting traditional 2020 Vitality Index of Traditional Environmental SDGs Goal
knowledge Knowledge 15.3
Mainstreaming traditional knowledge into DLDD
interventions
Outcome 3.5: Harmonized tools for coordination at national/subnational levels
National and subnational tools harmonized by 2018 Institute DLDD monitors
thematic areas
Compilation of templates to tabulate data for Standardized methodologies and tools NBSAP 15.2
planning, as well as maps
OPERATIONAL OBJECTIVE 4: CAPACITY NEEDS
Outcome 4.1: Capacity to formulate and enforce policy measures
Nationwide afforestation requirements to be 2025 Two nurseries per village NAPA PA 1
enforced by law
Economic incentives to strengthen ban on 2020 Effective ban on charcoal and notable NBSAP ST 3.5,
charcoal sustainable land management 7.2
Strict enforcement of zonal requirements on 2025 Environmental impact assessments conducted NBSAP ST 2, 15
fragile ecosystems on all development projects

--- Page 59 ---
59
Outcome 4.2: Consultative land-use planning and decentralized service delivery
Zoning to form basis of land-use planning 2018 Land-use plans by ecological zones and NBSAP ST 2, 15
Urban plans to incorporate elements of urban administrative borders
pastoralism and agriculture
Outcome 4.3: Measuring progress and reporting on indicators and multilateral environmental agreement requirements
National workshops to define and agree on 2018 Indicators verified and streamlined into
common indicators national plans
Harmonizing national plans with Somalia’s
multilateral environmental agreement obligations
Improving technical capacity of ministries and
parliamentary committees
OPERATIONAL OBJECTIVE 5: FINANCE AND TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER
Outcome 5.1: Integrated investment frameworks for multilateral environmental agreements at subnational levels
Preparing a macroeconomic framework for 2018 Macroeconomic/investment framework
resource mobilization endorsed
Utilizing ELD for the macroeconomic framework
for resource mobilization
Outcome 5.2: Promote efforts to mobilize funds from international funding mechanisms
Endorsed Somali NAP presented to Global 2016 Somali NAP finalized and endorsed NBSAP ST 17.3
Environment Facility and UNCCD Secretariat
Mobilizing funds through private sector Potential donors/investors approached NAPA PA 1
investments in sustainable land management
Outcome 5.3: Village Development Committees prepare own small-scale projects
Support local authorities in preparing 2020 Biannual trainings per district/region NAPA
project proposals for village natural resource
management
Providing disaster management funds for DLDD- National emergency funds for each region PA 3
related emergencies
ABBREVIATIONS
NAPA National Adaptation Plan of Action
NBSAP National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan
ST Strategic Target
PA Programme Area
SDG Sustainable Development Goal

--- Page 60 ---
60 SOMALIA NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMME FOR THE UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION TO COMBAT DESERTIFICATION
7. IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS
7.1 cooperation, will be represented in The NAP is a
the task force. Development partners,
IMPLEMENTATION comprehensive
academia, community-based organiza-
MECHANISM tions, NGOs, and the private sector programme that requires
will all be represented in the task
the state and its partners
force. The national focal point and the
The NAP is a comprehensive national task force will be responsible to take a multidisciplinary
programme that requires the state and
for the implementation of the National
approach to its
its partners to take a multidisciplinary
Action Programme.
approach to its implementation in implementation in order to
order to achieve its objectives. Several
The national task force, together with
achieve its objectives
organizations – including federal
the national focal point, will perform
and state-level government agencies,
the following functions:
local authorities, academic bodies,
• Provide overall policy guidance,
community-based organizations,
coordinate NAP implementa-
private sector actors, and other stake-
tion, and ensure stakeholder
holders – are expected to be engaged
engagement
in the planning and implementation of
• Compile the available data and
the projects, programmes, and actions.
information on land degradation
The Office of Environmental Affairs at
and the associated socio-economic
the Office of the Prime Minister, which
impacts in Somalia and engage
is the UNCCD focal point, will be
academia and experts in conduct-
responsible for coordinating the overall
ing additional research that might
implementation of the NAP, while a
be deemed necessary for the NAP
national task force will be formed for
implementation
the day-to-day implementation.
• Develop funding mechanism
for NAP operationalization, in
The national task force will be formed
collaboration with the Ministry of
by the Office of Environmental Affairs
Finance and development partners
at the Office of the Prime Minister.
Key environment line ministries • Constitute a technical monitor-
at both federal and state levels, ing committee for the NAP
including those related to agriculture, implementation
livestock, forestry, range, energy, water,
transport, planning, and international

--- Page 61 ---
61
7.2 MONITORING are to be set when developing detailed
programmes/projects related to the
AND EVALUATION
NAP implementation. The Office of
Environmental Affairs at the Office of
The National Action Programme will the Prime Minister will form a techni-
be presented to the national stakehold- cal monitoring committee to undertake
ers for validation, upon which the independent monitoring and also
national focal point will submit it to collect and compile monitoring reports
the UNCCD secretariat for endorse- from the institutions and agencies
ment. The NAP will be published and engaged in the NAP implementation.
disseminated to the general public The committee will produce biannual
and the relevant line ministries at and annual monitoring reports to
both federal and regional levels. This measure the achievements against the
will be followed by awareness-raising intended targets.
programmes on the NAP’s implemen-
tation and enforcement. It is proposed that independent
mid-term and final evaluations will be
Monitoring will be undertaken on all carried out on the implementation of
NAP-related activities and projects the NAP. The mid-term evaluation will
to assess the environmental and focus on the implemented activities
socio-economic impacts, identify and their results and impacts and
challenges, document best practices, will provide recommendations on
and determine how the implementa- possible adjustments and resource
tion activities are contributing to the mobilization needs for the remaining
strategic and operational objectives of period. The final evaluation is envis-
the ten-year strategy. The relevant line aged to provide information on the
ministries and agencies will be sup- overall achievements regarding the
ported to develop coherent monitoring strategic and operational objectives of
and evaluation systems. the ten-year strategy and also provide
recommendations on ensuring sustain-
Environmental and socio-economic ability. In addition, it will inform the
indicators and benchmarks will be de- formulation of Somalia’s second NAP
veloped for the identified priority areas and other development plans.
for monitoring the NAP implementa-
tion. The indicators and benchmarks

--- Page 62 ---
62 SOMALIA NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMME FOR THE UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION TO COMBAT DESERTIFICATION
REFERENCES
Academy for Peace and Development (2002). Regulating the Somaliland Livestock Economy. Draft report. http://www.apd-
somaliland.org, accessed 10 June 2010.
Academy for Peace and Development (2010). Contested Urban Land: Approaching Land Management and Land-based Conflicts in
Urban Somaliland. http://www.apd-somaliland.org, accessed 10 August 2010.
ACAPS (2011). ‘Secondary Data Review: Horn of Africa’. Geneva. http://acaps.org/, accessed 20 July 2015.
African Development Bank Group (2013). Somalia Country Brief 2013–2015. OREB Department. http://www.afdb.org/, accessed 7
August 2015.
Armed Conflict Location and Event Data Project (2015). ‘Real Time Data on Somalia Conflicts’. http://www.acleddata.com/data/
realtime-data-2015/, accessed 7 August 2015.
Beerdhige, M. (2012). Politics of Ethnicity and Resources in Puntland. http://www.somaliareport.com/, accessed 1 August 2015.
Berry, L., J. Olson, and D. Campbell (2003). Assessing the Extent, Cost and Impact of Land Degradation at the National Level: Findings
and Lessons Learned from Seven Pilot Case Studies. Global Mechanism: World Bank.
Bradbury, M. (1996). ‘Hostility and Hospitality: The Pastoral Dimensions of the Somali Civil Conflict’. Unpublished manuscript.
Bruyas, F. (2006). Somaliland and Puntland State of Somalia: The Land Legal Framework – Situation Analysis. UN-Habitat, Nairobi.
Burton, R. (1856). First Footsteps in East Africa, or An Exploration of Harar.
ELD Initiative (2013). The Rewards of Investing in Sustainable Land Management. Interim report for the Economics of Land
Degradation Initiative. www.eld-initiative.org/, accessed 7 May 2015.
Farah, I., A. Hussein, and J. Lind (2002). ‘Deegan Politics and War in Somalia’ in Scarcity and Surfeit by Lind and Sturman, eds.
South Africa: ISS.
Federal Government of Somalia and United Nations (2015). Joint Programme for Sustainable Charcoal Reduction and Alternative
Livelihoods.
General Service Agency (2016). Feasibility Study for Canals and Water Harvesting Infrastructures Development in Four Districts.

--- Page 63 ---
63
Gudger, W. and D. C. Barker (1993). ‘Banking for the Environment’ in FAO Agricultural Services Bulletin 103. http://www.fao.org/
docrep/t0719e/t0719e00.htm#Contents.
Guleid A., H. M. Gadain, F. M. Muthusi, and P. W. Muchiri (2007). Improving Flood Forecasting and Early Warning in Somalia.
Feasibility study, Technical Report No. W-10. Nairobi, Kenya: FAO-SWALIM.
Hadley, S. and S. Farah (2014). Assessment Report: Somalia Economic Growth Strategic Assessment. USAID http://pdf.usaid.gov/
pdf_docs/PA00JXG7.pdf, accessed 19 July 2015.
Hannam, I. and B. Boer (2002). Legal and Institutional Frameworks for Sustainable Soils: A Preliminary Report. Gland, Switzerland,
and Cambridge, UK: International Union for Conservation of Nature. https://portals.iucn.org/library/efiles/documents/EPLP-045.
pdf, accessed 8 June 2015.
Hannam, I. and B. Boer (2004). Drafting Legislation for Sustainable Use of Soils: A Guide. Gland, Switzerland, and Cambridge, UK:
International Union for Conservation of Nature.
Hoehne, M. (2015). Between Somaliland and Puntland. Nairobi: Rift Valley Institute. http://www.riftvalley.net/publication/,
accessed 28 July 2015.
Hussein, A. A. (2012). ‘Minerals of Somalia: From Exploration to Artisanal Production to Export’. SomaliaTalk.com. http://somali-
atalk.com/2013/minerals_of_somalia.pdf, accessed 15 June 2015.
International Union for Conservation of Nature (2006). Country Environmental Profile for Somalia. Nairobi: IUCN Eastern African
Regional Office: Nairobi. http://www.eeas.europa.eu/.
Lewis, I. M. (1994). Blood and Bone: The Call of Kinship in Somali Society. The Red Sea Press.
Lewis, I. M. (1999). A Pastoral Democracy: A Study of Pastoralism and Politics among the Northern Somali of the Horn of Africa.
Hamburg/Oxford: Lit Verlag Münster-Hamburg / James Currey Publishers.
Macfadyen, W. (1950). ‘Soil and Vegetation in British Somaliland’ in Nature. London: Nature Publishing Group.
Ministry of Environment and Rural Development (2014). Baseline Survey: Status of Forests and Grazing Reserve and their
Management in Awdal, Sahil, Togdheer, Maroode Jeex and Sanaag Regions. Hargeisa, Republic of Somaliland.
Ministry of Environment and Rural Development and International Labour Organization (2014). Integrated Natural Resources
Management Plan for Burao Town, Somaliland.
Mohamed, A. E. (2013). ‘Managing Shared Basins in the Horn of Africa – Ethiopian Projects on the Juba and Shabelle Rivers and
Downstream Effects in Somalia’ in Natural Resources and Conservation. http://www.hrpub.org, accessed 8 June 2015.

--- Page 64 ---
64 SOMALIA NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMME FOR THE UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION TO COMBAT DESERTIFICATION
Mukhayer, H. (2012). Integrating Land-use and Water Management: Making Ecosystem Services Work for the Poor. Dundee, Scotland:
University of Dundee. http://www.dundee.ac.uk/cepmlp/gateway/index.php?news=32348, accessed 13 May 2015.
Mumuli, S. and J. Njeru (2015). ‘Land Degradation in Somalia’ in SWALIM Update, 8th Edition. Nairobi: FAO-SWALIM. http://
www.faoswalim.org/resources/site_files/SWALIM%20Update%20Issue%208.pdf, accessed 28 July 2015.
Omuto, C. T., Z. Balint, and M. S. Alim (2011). A Framework for National Assessment of Land Degradation in the Drylands: A Case
Study of Somalia. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Puntland Ministry of Planning and Statistics (2003). Puntland in Figures. Garowe, Puntland State of Somalia. http://siteresources.
worldbank.org/SOMALIAEXTN/Resources/PuntlandFigures.pdf, accessed 7 August 2015.
Republic of Somaliland. Maroodi-jeex Regional Committee for Land Dispute, Case No. GGDH/MJ/74-12/G-84/2013.
Republic of Somaliland. Maroodi-jeex Regional Committee for Land Dispute, Case No. GGDH/MJ/7-14/G-124/2014.
Roba, G., M. Samantar, A. Zeila, and H. Yussuf (2013). Natural Resources Management Project Baseline Survey Report for Puntland.
Garowe: Adeso/CARE.
Swayne, H. G. C. (1903). Seventeen Trips through Somaliland and a Visit to Abyssinia. Third Edition. London: Rowland Ward
Limited, Forgotten Books www.forgottenbooks.com, accessed 5 July 2015.
UN-Habitat (2015a). ‘Simple Matrix on LDT Case-Decisions’. Unpublished summary. Document with NAP/ELD Technical
Expert.
UN-Habitat (2015b). ‘Overview of Land-related Activities Carried Out by UN-Habitat for the UN Joint Programme on Local
Governance and Decentralized Service Delivery’. Unpublished summary. Document with NAP/ELD Technical Expert.
United Nations and Federal Government of Somalia (2013). UN Joint Programme for Sustainable Charcoal Production and Alternative
Livelihoods.
United Nations and World Bank (2006). Somali Joint Needs Assessment: Productive Sectors and Environment Cluster Report.
United Nations Environment Programme (2005). State of the Environment in Somalia: A Desk Study. UNEP Regional Office for
Africa: Nairobi.
United Nations Environment Programme (2006). Somalia Joint Needs Assessment: Environment Sub-cluster Report.
United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization – Somalia Water and Land Information Management or FAO SWALIM (2015).
‘Flood Monitoring’. http://www.faoswalim.org/water/floods/flood-monitoring, accessed 5 June 2015.

--- Page 65 ---
65
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (2014). Somalia Humanitarian Needs Overview 2015. https://
somalia.humanitarianresponse.info/assessment-registry, accessed 10 August 2015.
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (2015). Humanitarian Bulletin Somalia May/June 2015. http://
www.unocha.org/somalia/, accessed 10 August 2015.
United Nations Population Fund or UNFPA (2014). Population Estimation Survey 2014 for the 18 Pre-war Regions of Somalia.
Unruh, J. (1995a). ‘Pastoralist Resource Use and Access in Somalia: A Changing Context of Development, Environmental Stress,
and Conflict’ in Disaster and Development in the Horn of Africa by J. Sorenson, ed. London: Macmillan.
Unruh, J. (1995b). ‘The Relationship between Indigenous Pastoralist Resource Tenure and State Tenure in Somalia’. GeoJournal 36.
Unruh, J. (2004). ‘Migration Induced Legal Pluralism in Land Tenure: Implications for Environmental Change’ in Environmental
Change and Its Implications for Population Migration by J. Unruh, M. S. Krol, and N. Kliot, eds. Netherlands: Kluwer Academic
Publishers.
von Thünen (1826, 1942 and 1875). Uer lsolierte Staat in Beziehung auf ’ Landwirtschaft un!d NutionaZokonomi,e, Part I, II, III cited
in Von Thünen and Urban Sprawl (R. Sinclair, 1967). Annals of the Association of American Geographers, Volume 57, Issue 1, 1967.
http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1467-8306.1967.tb00591.x#, accessed 20 June 2015.
Watson, R. M., C. I. Tippett, J. J. Beckett, and V. Scholes (1979). Central Rangeland Survey. Somali Democratic Republic. London:
Resource Management & Research.
Watson, R. M. (1982). Northern Rangelands Survey. Somali Democratic Republic. London: Resource Management & Research.
Watson, R. M. and J. M. Nimmo (1985). Southern Rangelands Survey. Somali Democratic Republic. London: Resource
Management & Research.
Williamson, R. (2014). ‘Securing Oil in Somaliland’. https://www.beaconreader.com/rachel-williamson/securing-oil-in-somaliland,
accessed 6 Aug 2015.
World Bank (2014). ‘New World Bank GDP and Poverty Estimates for Somalia’. Washington, DC: World Bank. http://www.
worldbank.org/, accessed 19 July 2015.
World Bank (2014). ‘Somaliland Economic Conference, 24 January 2014’. Hargeisa: World Bank. http://somalilandmof.com/,
accessed 7 August 2015.
World Food Programme (2016). Atlas of Climate Risk and Food Security in the Greater Horn of Africa Region.
World Health Organization (2006). Somalia’s Situational Environmental Health Assessment of Three Zones. WHO Office for Somalia.

--- Page 66 ---
66 SOMALIA NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMME FOR THE UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION TO COMBAT DESERTIFICATION
ANNEX I: OBJECTIVES AND AGENDA OF
THE CONSULTATIONS
April 2015 Meetings and Geospatial Data Collection
• Meeting with Ministry of Environment and arranging of meetings with other ministries
• Food and Agriculture Organization/Somalia Water and Land Information Management maps on land degradation, agro-
ecological zones, etc.
• Rule of Law (UNDP Somalia) internal meeting with UNDP colleagues to explore link between land resources and rights –
arrange meeting with Ministry of Justice
April–May 2015 Focus Group Discussions
Traditional elders, pastoralist associations, and women’s groups will be engaged in focus group discussions surrounding their connec-
tion to land and their experience of its degradation.
Aim of session: Understanding the Somali connection to land in Somaliland and the linkage between environmental degradation of
land resources and the socio-economic implications.
Questions: The discussions will involve answering a set of structured, open-ended questions on the economic and sociocultural value
of land, competing claims to land, and enforcement of rights and responsibilities surrounding access to and use of natural resources.

--- Page 67 ---
67
April–June 2015 Consultative Workshops
The consultative workshop will bring together representatives from central ministries, members of parliament, representatives from
specialized agencies, civil society representatives, regional representatives, and selected district representatives. The workshop will
consist of four sessions, as below.
Opening Session:
Opening Remarks and Welcome Ministry/UNDP
Day One:
Session A: Background to UN Convention on Climate Change and Desertification NAP Technical Expert
Somali NAP Process
Introduction to Economics of Land Degradation
Session B: Consultations and Priority Identification
Day Two:
Session C: Overview of Priority areas Technical Expert/Mukhayer
Commitments
Session D: Preliminary Endorsements
Closing Session:
Re-cap and Summary Mukhayer/NAP Technical Expert
Closing Remarks Ministry of Environment, co-chaired by Ministry of Planning
ELD video: Value of Soil

--- Page 68 ---
68 SOMALIA NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMME FOR THE UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION TO COMBAT DESERTIFICATION
ANNEX II: CONSULTATIVE PROCESS
Somaliland Consultations, 2–3rd May 2015
Venue: Ambassador Hotel
Stakeholders consulted included participants from the six regions of Awdal, Saaxil, Maroodi-Jeeh, Tog-dheer, Sool, and Sanaag,
represented by traditional elders, governors, and deputy governors from each region. Government ministries and representatives that
engaged in the consultation processes included the following: Commissioner of the National Environment Research and Disaster-
preparedness Authority (NERAD) and technical specialists, Minister of Livestock and Animal Husbandry, including regional
coordinators, Minister of Agriculture and Irrigation, Minister of Water Resources, Ministry of Public Works, Ministry of National
Planning and Development, Ministry of Interior, and Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs.
From the legislative branch of the Somaliland government, the Parliamentary Committee on Environment and Natural Resources
and traditional elders and religious leaders were represented. Members of civil society included non-governmental organizations
and research institutions: Candlelight, Agriculture Development Organization (ADO), Pastoral and Environmental Network in the
Horn of Africa, Horn Youth Development Association, Himilo Relief, Rehabilitation, and Development Association (HIRDA),
Horn of Africa Voluntary Youth Committee (HAVOYOCO), Initiative for Research and Development Action (IRADA), Partner
Aid, Somaliland National Youth Organization (SONYO), Somaliland Non-State Actors Forum (SONSAF), Oxfam, UN Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, University of Hargeisa, Gollis University, and the women’s group Nagaad Umbrella.

--- Page 69 ---
69

--- Page 70 ---
70 SOMALIA NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMME FOR THE UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION TO COMBAT DESERTIFICATION

--- Page 71 ---
71

--- Page 72 ---
72 SOMALIA NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMME FOR THE UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION TO COMBAT DESERTIFICATION