--- Page 1 ---
Eswatini National Drought Plan
The Kingdom of Eswatini
Ministry of Agriculture
August 2020

--- Page 2 ---
Contents
Eswatini National Drought Plan 1
List of acronyms and abbreviations 4
Acknowledgements 6
Executive Summary 7
CHAPTER 1: BACKGROUND 9
1.1 Drought Overview 9
1.2 Purpose and Scope of the National Drought Plan 9
1.3 Guiding Principles 11
2.1 Location and Bio-Physical Characteristics 12
2.2 Climate 12
2.3 Social Context 12
2.4 Water Supply and Demand 13
2.5 Climate Change and Drought 14
2.6 Historical Drought Occurrences 14
2.7 Activities During Past Droughts 16
CHAPTER 3: LEGISLATIVE AND INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK 18
3.1 Related Policies, Legislation, Strategic Plans and Programmes 18
3.2 Relevant Regional and International Policy Framework 20
3.3 Drought Management in Eswatini 21
3.4 Challenges Facing Disaster Risk Management in Eswatini 22
3.5 Proposed Coordination of the National Drought Plan 26
CHAPTER 4: DROUGHT MONITORING, FORECASTING & IMPACT ASSESSMENT 28
4.1 Drought Monitoring Indicators 28
4.2 Current Drought Monitoring in Eswatini 30
4.3 Development of the Eswatini Drought Monitor 31
4.4 Drought Impact Assessment 33
4.5 Drought Impact Reporting 34
CHAPTER 5: DROUGHT RISK AND VULNERABILITY 35
5.1 Definitions 35
5.2 Drought Risk Mapping by the European Commission Joint Research Centre 36
5.3 Assessing Drought Vulnerability 37
CHAPTER 6: DROUGHT COMMUNICATION AND RESPONSE ACTIONS 39
2

--- Page 3 ---
6.1 Drought Communication Protocol 39
6.2 Declaration of Drought Conditions 39
6.3 Communication and Coordination Guidelines and Response Actions 40
CHAPTER 7: DROUGHT MITIGATION AND PREPAREDNESS 43
CHAPTER 8: THE ESWATINI NATIONAL DROUGHT ACTION PLAN 46
8.1 Guiding Principles 46
8.2 Goals, Objectives and Activities of the National Drought Plan 46
CHAPTER 9: IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS 48
9.1 Mechanisms for Implementation 48
9.2 Monitoring and Reporting 49
9.3 Future Updates and Revisions 50
References 50
Appendix 1: Eswatini National Drought Action Plan 54
3

--- Page 4 ---
List of acronyms and abbreviations
CA Conservation Agriculture
CANGO Coalition Assembly of national NGO’s
CASP Comprehensive Agriculture Sector Policy
CBOs Community Based Organizations
CCA Climate Change Adaptation
CDP Community Development Plan
CSA Climate Smart Agriculture
CSO Central Statistics Office
DLDD Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought
DPMO Deputy Prime Minister’s Office
DRM Disaster Risk Management
DRR Disaster Risk Reduction
DWA Department of Water Affairs
EEA Eswatini Environment Authority
EMS Eswatini Meteorological Services
EOC Emergency Operation Centre
EPR Emergency Preparedness and Response
ER Early Recovery
ESWADE Eswatini Water and Agricultural Development Enterprise
ESWC Eswatini Water Services Corporation
EW Early Warning
EWS Early Warning System
FAO Food and Agricultural Organization
GDP Gross Domestic Product
GEF Global Environment Fund
GoE Government of Eswatini
IOHL Institutes of Higher Learning
IPPC Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
IWRM Integrated Water Resources Management
KOBWA Komati Basin Water Authority
LUSIP Lower Usuthu Smallholder Irrigation Project
LUSLM Lower Usuthu Sustainable Land Management
MDGs Millennium Development Goals
MEPD Ministry of Economic Planning and Development
MHCP Multi Hazard Contingency Plan
MNRE Ministry of Natural Resources and Energy
MoA Ministry of Agriculture
MoET Ministry of Education and Training
MoH Ministry of Health
MTEA Ministry of Tourism and Environmental Affairs
MTRD Ministry of Tinkhundla and Regional Development
NAP National Action Programme
4

--- Page 5 ---
NBSAP National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Programme
NCCP National Climate Change Policy
NDMA National Disaster Management Agency
NDP National Drought Plan
NDS National Development Strategy
NDTF National Drought Task Force
NEWU National Early Warning Unit
NFP National Focal Point
NGO Non-Governmental Organization
NWA National Water Authority
PNRI Percentage of Normal Rainfall Index
RDRMC Regional Disaster Risk Management Committee
SDGs Sustainable Development Goals
SEAP Swaziland Environmental Action Plan
SWALGA Swaziland Association for Local Government Authorities
TNA Technology Needs Assessment
TWRM Trans-boundary Water Resources Management
ULA Urban Local Authorities
UNCBD United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity
UNCCD United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification
UNCT United Nations Country Team
UNESWA University of Eswatini
UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
UNISDR United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction
WASH Water and Sanitation Hygiene
WFO World Food Programme
5

--- Page 6 ---
Acknowledgements
The Eswatini National Drought Plan (NDP) was compiled under the Drought Initiative of the United Nations
Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD). The authors acknowledge the Ministry of Agriculture for
guidance during the preparation of the NDP, particularly the UNCCD National Focal Point, Mr. Bongani
Masuku, the Senior Land Planning Officer Mr. Bongani Magongo and the Land Development Officer, Mr.
Sipho Shiba. The Eswatini Water and Agricultural Development Enterprise is kindly appreciated for
assistance with workshop logistics and funding the workshops. Valuable inputs were also provided by the
National Disaster Management Agency (NDMA) and officials from various stakeholders. These include the
Department of Water Affairs, Eswatini Meteorological Serves (EMS), University of Eswatini, Eswatini water
Services Corporation and Eswatini Environment Authority. Civil Society Organizations also contributed
through the participation of WaterAid, Eswatini Red Cross Society and others.
The UNCCD provided funding for the NDP development process and Mr. Hansol Park, the Programme
Officer under the Drought Initiative offered valuable support and guidance throughout the formulation
process. Previous national assessments of drought impacts from various national reports to the United
Nations Rio Conventions provided valuable information for the NDP. The participants of the national
workshop who convened to discuss the NDP are also very much appreciated for giving their personal time
to provide their input and suggestions.
6

--- Page 7 ---
Executive Summary
Drought is a prolonged dry period in the natural climate cycle that can occur anywhere in the world.
Drought is a natural disaster of significant concern in Eswatini. Although Eswatini has a sub-tropical
climate with rainfall ranging from 400 - 1,500 mm per year, a modest drop in normal rainfall can trigger
water shortages. The recent droughts of 2015 to 2016 led to major losses in the agriculture, wildlife, and
forestry sectors and affected human health in all the country’s regions. Eswatini’s drought vulnerability
assessments indicates an increasing trend in the frequency of very hot days exceeding 36°C in the
country, which may induce more frequent and intense droughts in future. It is therefore, critical that the
Eswatini citizens be well prepared in the event of a drought.
Drought vulnerability in Eswatini is compounded by the poor economy and the subsistence nature of
agriculture, whereby most of the farming is done on small scale basis and is often only sufficient to
feed the farmer’s immediate household. Preparing for drought and reducing the risk and mitigating
the impacts of drought are paramount given the significant vulnerabilities in the country.
This National Drought Plan for Eswatini has several specific purposes. Firstly, it provides a compendium
of the most up to date information on drought occurrence, impacts and risk in Eswatini. Secondly, it
identifies a series of short-term immediate monitoring, communicating and response actions to address
imminent drought impacts. Thirdly, it identifies longer-term actions that help prepare for future droughts
by reducing drought risk. And finally, it provides a coordinated and consistent approach for government
agencies, civil society, donors and the private sector actors to reduce the impacts of drought.
The Eswatini NDP is planned for 10 years (2020 – 2030) to be in line with the UNCCD Revised Strategy
(2018 -2030) and it’s supporting instruments such as the LDN Scientific and Conceptual Framework. The
Eswatini NDP follows best-practice models for disaster management, including but not limited to, the
Sendai Framework and the Theoretical National Drought Plan Framework. Its implementation relies on
Eswatini’s disaster risk reduction, which is set out in the National Disaster Management Act (2006), which
establishes 9 clusters for disaster reduction, including the three clusters (food and agriculture, health and
water and sanitation) which are most affected by drought. Under the NDP, clusters and various
government ministries are given specific responsibilities of preparing, monitoring, communicating,
responding to and recovering from drought.
The NDP envisions a drought resilient Eswatini by 2030 hence its lay-out is structured into goals, objectives and
activities that have been developed around the three pillars for drought risk management. In addition, a
fourth pillar is proposed which addresses cross cutting-issues. The NDP therefore has four (4) distinct yet
mutually reinforcing pillars, namely:
● Implementing Drought Monitoring, Early Warning Systems and Impact Assessment.
● Assessment and Management of Drought Risk and Vulnerability.
● Implementing Measures to Limit Impacts of Drought and Better Respond to Drought.
● Addressing cross-cutting issues that lead to transformative changes in drought risk reduction.
The summary of NDP pillars, goals and objectives are shown in Box 1 below. The detailed actions are
7

--- Page 8 ---
outlined in appendix 1. The NDP encompasses a paradigm shift from a reactive emergency response
emphasis to a proactive one of reducing the country’s vulnerability and increasing drought resilience.
Table 6 describes the triggers and responses that should be made during the various phases of a drought
based on different levels of drought indicators (Standardized Precipitation Index and Percent Normal
Rainfall Index).
Box 1: Summary of Eswatini NDP pillars, goals and objectives.
Component / Key Pillar Goals Objectives
Component 1 (Key Pillar 1): Goal 1: Robust Objective 1: Strengthen Early Warning
Implementing Drought drought monitoring Systems
Monitoring, Early Warning and early warning Objective 2: Disseminate reliable warning
Systems and Impact messages so that response to the risks are
Assessment. measured and timely
Objective 3: Undertake drought impact
assessment
Component 2 (Key Pillar 2): Goal 2: Better Objective 1: Undertake drought impact
Assessment and assessment of drought assessment
Management of Drought risk and vulnerabilities
Risk and Vulnerability.
Component 3 (Key Pillar 3): Goal3: Effective Objective 1 : Respond to drought as it
Implementing Measures to response during unfolds
Limit Impacts of Drought and drought events
Better Respond to Drought. Goal 4: Enhanced Objective 1: Improve drought understanding
Drought Preparedness, Objective 2: Reduce drought risk and
Mitigation and vulnerability (Mitigation)
Resilience Objective 3: Support activities that increase
resilience to drought
Objective 4: Improve water supply and
demand management
Objective 5: Improve national food and
nutrition security
Objective 6: Improve agricultural resilience
to drought
Goal 5: Drought Risk Objective 1: Minimize losses due to drought
Transfer and sharing
Component 4 (key Pillar 4 ) Goal 6: Improve Objective 1: Improve drought
Addressing cross-cutting communication, communication and awareness
issues that lead to awareness, capacity Objective 2 Strengthen capacity to cope
transformative changes in building, drought with drought
drought risk reduction mainstreaming and Objective 3 Mainstream drought into
resource mobilization. ministerial and sectoral plans
Objective 4 Mainstream gender into drought
risk reduction
Objective 5: Mobilizing of adequate
resources for drought preparedness, itoring
and response
8

--- Page 9 ---
CHAPTER 1: BACKGROUND
1.1 Drought Overview
Drought can be defined as a prolonged dry period in the natural climate cycle that can occur anywhere in
the world. Drought is a normal, recurring feature of climate and can occur in high and low rainfall areas
(Wilhite, 2000). Drought is a protracted period of deficient precipitation resulting in extensive damage
to crops, and a consequential loss of yield. Another way of defining drought would be to consider the
decrease in precipitation (less rain) as the underlying cause of the drought, while soil moisture, runoff and
socio-economic issues could be considered as first or second-order impacts.
http://drought.unl.edu/Education/DroughtIn-depth/WhatisDrought.aspx,
https://public.wmo.int/en/our-mandate/water/drought
Whichever definition is used, a drought represents a situation when reduced rainfall and diminished water
supply affects all sectors and human activities that depend on water supply. Unlike other hazards such as
floods, hurricanes and wildfires (which have a clear beginning and end), drought is a slow on-set hazard
and its effects are not felt at once and can only be partially anticipated. Further, drought has unique
characteristics that exacerbate other hazards (American Planning Association, 2019).
According to Wilhite and Glantz, 1985; Wilhite, 2000; and Crausbay et al. 2017, drought can be categorized
into five main types, as follows:
Meteorological drought: occurs when there is a period of below average precipitation.
Hydrological drought: occurs when there are deficiencies in surface and subsurface water supplies. It is
generally measured as streamflow, lake, reservoir, and groundwater levels.
Agricultural drought: occurs when there is an inadequate water supply to meet the needs of crops and
other agricultural operations such as livestock.
Socio-economic drought: occurs when a drought impacts health, well-being, and quality of life, or when
a drought starts to have an adverse economic impact in a country or region.
Ecological drought: occurs when deficiencies in surface water supplies create multiple distresses across
ecosystems, impacting the flow of ecosystem services.
Quantifying the beginning and ending of drought is often very difficult hence, drought is typically known
as a creeping phenomenon because of its slow onset, which makes it difficult for a community to know
when they are entering or leaving a drought period and how long it will last - months or years. Drought
conditions often remain unnoticed until water shortages become severe and impacts become evident as
they progress over time.
1.2 Purpose and Scope of the National Drought Plan
9

--- Page 10 ---
The NDP assesses the institutional and legislative framework for DRR in Eswatini by identifying the role
players and drought issues in all relevant Eswatini policies, plans and legislation related to drought. These
include national instruments which relate to agriculture, land use planning, rural economic development,
poverty reduction, water resource management and development, ecosystem and biodiversity
conservation, health and built infrastructure.
Climate projections suggest that there will be persistent droughts over southern Africa, including Eswatini
that are more intense than what has been experienced in the 20th century (Fourth National Climate
Assessment 2018). The impacts of drought are many, but usually include damage to crops and reductions
in crop yields, death of livestock and wildlife, increased fire hazard, reduced freshwater availability, and
damage to wildlife and fish habitats.
The impacts of drought have many economic and social consequences including reduced income for the
agriculture and broader economic sectors, higher food prices and unemployment. Drought planning,
including preparedness and risk mitigation measures, will help reduce the impacts and enhance human
well-being and security during and after drought. Therefore, preparing for drought and reducing the risk
and mitigating the impacts of drought are paramount given the high incidence of land degradation and
human poverty and malnutrition in Eswatini.
The NDP provides information on the challenges faced on drought management at the local and national
level. It also draws attention to areas that require national collaboration to enhance consistent and
coordinated national approaches by providing clarity around priorities, roles and responsibilities at all
levels.
The NDP documents the risk of drought and outline a series of approaches and actions Eswatini can take
to prepare for and increase resilience to drought. It brings together the key government agencies,
communities, and NGO’s and private sector organizations to take a proactive approach to drought
management and develop appropriate response actions when drought occurs.
The NDP envisions improved mitigation of the adverse effects of drought in all areas of Eswatini resulting
in increased drought resilience of the country’s economic sectors, ecosystems and communities. It
supports best-practice models for disaster management, including but not limited to, the Sendai
Framework and the Theoretical National Drought Plan Framework (Crossman, 2017; UNCCD, 2018),
which is operationalized via three priority pillars, namely:
a. Implementing Drought Monitoring, Early Warning Systems and Impact Assessment.
b. Assessment and Management of Drought Risk and Vulnerability.
c. Implementing Measures to Limit Impacts of Drought and Better Respond to Drought.
In addition the NDP, addresses cross-cutting issues that lead to transformative changes in drought risk
reduction, including awareness raising, capacity building and mainstreaming specific drought issues that
affect vulnerable groups such as women, youth and people leaving with disabilities.
10

--- Page 11 ---
The NDP actions are informed by previous assessments of risk and vulnerability in Eswatini. Continuous drought
monitoring and forecasting is promoted so that the indicators are used to trigger drought management
responses. There are three key indicators that are recommended for use in Eswatini to monitor and
forecast drought onset, duration, conclusion, severity and impacts in the plan, namely Standard
Precipitation Index (SPI), Land Surface Temperature (LST) and Normalized Difference Vegetation Index
(NDVI).
The NDP is closely aligned to the Revised UNCCD Strategic Plan (2018-2030) and it’s supporting
instruments such as the LDN Conceptual Framework. It also supports other on-going national initiatives
including poverty reduction programmes. Some of the proposed actions in the NDP, such as under Goal
4, are transformative in nature hence they can be attained in the long-term, while some are high-level
actions which can be best pursued using a multi-sectoral approach. The timeframe for the NDP is
therefore set at 10 years (2020 – 2030).
The NDMA will coordinate the implementation of actions outlined in the NDP, while the MoA will serve
as the Secretariat. The Ministry of Agriculture will use the NDP to report to the UNCCD on drought
management in Eswatini. The National Disaster Management Agency (NDMA) is the national institution
that is mandated to coordinate disaster risk reduction (DRR) in Eswatiini.
1.3 Guiding Principles
The National Drought Plan shall be used to deliver a robust drought risk reduction process in Eswatini,
guided by the following four principles.
1. Drought is a recurring phenomenon hence it is best managed by continuously monitoring, early
warning, impact assessment and integrating results into drought response plans.
2. The assessment and management of drought risk and vulnerability is key to effective drought risk
reduction, so that mostly affected groups are included in drought decision-making processes, plans
and policies.
3. Eswatini needs to better prepare for drought by adopting measures that Limit the Impacts of Drought
and help the country respond to drought better.
4. Drought is best managed by addressing several cross-cutting issues and mainstreaming drought into
existing national programmes, sectoral policies and plans, including the National Disaster
Management Agency programmes
11

--- Page 12 ---
CHAPTER 2: THE IMPACT OF DROUGHT IN ESWATINI
2.1 Location and Bio-Physical Characteristics
The Kingdom of Eswatini is a landlocked and mountainous country, with a land area of 17,363 sq.km that
is situated in the south eastern part of the African Continent, bounded by the Republic of South Africa on
the north, west and south and by the Republic of Mozambique to the east (Manyatsi et. al. 2010).
Eswatini’s amazing variety of reliefs has four well-defined physiographic regions, extending longitudinally
from north to south in roughly parallel belts. The land is classified into six physiographic zones. Highveld,
Upper Middleveld, Lower Middleveld, Western Lowveld, Eastern Lowveld and Lubombo Range, (Sweet
and Khumalo, 1994). Each of the physiographic regions has its own climate. In terms of altitude, Eswatini’s
highest summit point stands at 1 862 m above sea level, and the lowest point is at 152.4 m, with four
ecosystems (aquatic, forest montane grassland and woodland-savannah mosaic represented in the steep
gradient).
2.2 Climate
Eswatini has a sub-tropical climate with summer rains (with 75% in the period between October and
March) and distinct seasons. It has 4 distinct ecological zones with different climatic conditions that range
from temperate and sub-humid in the Highveld to semi-arid in the Lowveld. The country is influenced by
air masses from different origins: equatorial convergence zone, sub-tropical eastern continental moist
maritime, dry continental tropical and marine west Mediterranean (GOE, 1997).
Mean annual rainfall ranges from about 1 500 mm in the northern Highveld to 400 mm in the southern
Lowveld. Precipitation varies considerably however from year to year, which leads to increases instances
of flash flooding or drought. High recorded rainfall variation makes it difficult to identify trends with a high
degree of certainty.
Drought is an inherent feature of the current semi-arid climate. Rainfall levels have consistently reduced
over the last five years (since the 2011/12 season). The El Niño phenomenon has exacerbated the drought
during the period, where the lowest rainfall levels over the five year period occurred during the 2015/16
season (Government of Eswatini, 2016b). The recorded and projected climate trends indicate that the
Kingdom of Eswatini is particularly vulnerable to the effects of climate change. Measures to improve the
functioning and wider disbursement of meteorological stations will assist the country to monitor and
record climate related trends.
2.3 Social Context
Eswatini has a population of 1.3 million people of which 53% are women. The country is classified as a
Lower Middle Income country with a per capita GDP of $3,500 and a GDP of $6.259 billion. Despite this
classification, Eswatini still faces a number of serious development challenges which have been
summarized in the United Nations Development Assistance Framework (2016-2020) as:
Slow economic growth; high levels of inequality and poverty; high unemployment rates especially
amongst the youth; high incidence and prevalence of communicable (HIV and TB) and non-communicable
diseases in the face of health system constraints; high maternal mortality; high levels of chronic
malnutrition; increasing number of vulnerable households; limited research and technical capacity to
generate timely and quality data to inform integration of risks and climate change adaptation and;
12

--- Page 13 ---
capacity constraints to effectively implement pro-poor development policies and slow uptake of
development innovations at community level.
The poverty level is estimated at 63% with high income inequality. Unemployment stood at 47.1% for the
overall population in 2013 with youth and women more adversely affected by unemployment. Rural
households involved in subsistence farming activities are the poorest. Poverty is closely correlated to the
extent of food security mainly due to unsustainable farming techniques, low rainfall and limited arable
land. The poverty situation is worsened HIV/AIDS and the effects of climate change manifested in chronic
droughts.
Eswatini's economy is predominantly agro-based with 77% of the population residing in rural areas and
deriving their livelihoods from subsistence agriculture. The informal agricultural sector is largely
responsible for the production of maize, legumes, sorghum and sweet potatoes. In addition, sugar cane
and cotton are produced as cash crops in the informal sector. As the main producers of food crops, small
and subsistence farmers operating in the informal sector are responsible for the production aspect of food
security. The large scale operators under the Title Deed Land subsector cultivate almost exclusively, sugar
cane, citrus and forests. Their involvement with food crops is limited.
2.4 Water Supply and Demand
Eswatini has been classified as a water scarce country where water supply comes from rainfall, surface
water resources (rivers, dams, reservoirs) and groundwater. A variety of rivers traverse through Eswatini
including Mlumati, Komati, Lusutfu, Ngwavuma and Mbuluzi Rivers, with an estimated 4.5km3/year of
surface water, half of which originate in South Africa (GOE, 2014; Manyatsi and Brown, 2009). Water
bodies make up only 4% of the land surface area, which is about 160 km2 of the total area of 17,364 km2.
About 50% of the country is classified as dry sub-humid to moist semi-arid (see figures below).
Figure 1: The major river basins in Eswatini and zones classified by levels of aridity (Source: Matondo (undated))
13

--- Page 14 ---
2.5 Climate Change and Drought
Droughts occur naturally, but climate change has generally accelerated the hydrological processes to
make them set in quicker and become more intense, with many consequences (Mukherjee, Mishra &
Trenberth, 2018). The impacts of climate change has been felt in many economic sectors of Eswatini
including land, agriculture, water, forests and health, due to sharp reduction in crop yields in recent years,
(Mhlanga-Ndlovu and Nhamo, 2017). Drought is an integral part of the actions that Eswatini needs in her
proactive approach to climate change adaptation and disaster risk reduction. Thus the NDP needs to
appreciate future projects on drought due to climate change predictions and prioritize accurate weather
forecasting accurately to assist early planning for drought.
2.6 Historical Drought Occurrences
Drought is a natural climatic phenomenon that can potentially occur anywhere in the world. Eswatini is
vulnerable to drought and other extreme natural and human induced hazards. Between 1980 and 2014,
about ten drought events have been recorded with varying periods and intensity (see figure 2 below).
Drought is a natural disaster of significant concern in Eswatini since prediction by the IPCC (2016) indicate
that future drought events will be longer, more frequent and more intense in southern Africa, including
Eswatini.
Figure 2: Record of drought events in Eswatini from 1981 to 2013. (Source: NDMA)
2.6.1 Environmental Impacts
Although Eswatini has a sub- tropical climate receiving up to 400 -1 500 mm of average annual rainfall, El
Nino events have triggered extended periods of well below average rainfall leading to major water
shortages and crop losses.
14

--- Page 15 ---
The impacts from drought in Eswatini include grass and forest fires, food shortages, reduced hydropower
generation, loss of income and increased crime rates. The high incidence of poverty and malnutrition in
Eswatini compounds the impacts of drought (https://public.wmo.int/en/our-mandate/water/drought).
This makes drought risk alone to be capable of undermining the capacity of the country to make the capital
investments and social expenditures necessary to develop sustainably. In Africa, it is estimated that
drought accounts for more than 95 percent of the death toll caused by disasters and more than 80 percent
of the number of people affected by disasters (UNCCD, 2019).
2.6.2 Social Impacts
Food security was also affected since drought is connected to climate change, mitigation and food security
where the country’s poorer communities are most at risk of global climate variations and global
commodity price fluctuations. Drought exuberates the country’s challenges to producing enough food to
cover domestic requirements, contributing to the food insecurity of an estimated 20%-25% of the
population (UNDP, 2012).
In 2015, an estimated 25% of Eswatini’s population was severely food insecure, which is in contrast to the
2012 figure, which was 7% (FAO/WFP, 2015). While food insecurity can cause lasting damage to future
generations and to the environment, it can also cause physical harm ranging from malnutrition to death.
Over the past decade, drought has continued to put a heavy toll on the well-being of individuals and
communities in the country. During the 2015/16 drought about 620 000 people received support either
as in kind or cash transfers and over 80 000 cattle deaths were recorded (FAO, 2017). The total economic
loss was about E3.843 billion (Equivalent to USD 308 million), representing a 7.01% of the country’s GDP
or 18.58% of government expenditure that year. Women, children and people in vulnerable situations
were disproportionately affected.
Figure 3: Declining seasonal average temperatures and rainfall recorded in Eswatini during the El Nino
drought of 2015/16. (Source: NDMA).
15

--- Page 16 ---
Figure 4: The increasing number of people depending on food grants due to drought incidents in Eswatini
(Source: WFP).
2.7 Activities During Past Droughts
2.7.1 Food Distribution
The Government of Eswatini supported household food security during past droughts targeting vulnerable
groups during food distribution. Under the vulnerable group food distribution programmes in the past,
free food was distributed to specific groups during drought periods. These groups included individuals
living in households with no source of income, including children aged five years and under, pregnant and
lactating mothers, people over 60 years of age, mentally and physically handicapped persons, and persons
certified as malnourished by hospital or clinic staff. In practice, there has sometimes been reluctance at
the local level to distinguish between households with and without income, as required. Although
programmes were financed from the Government and donors, delivery has been contracted out to NGOs.
Evaluation of the vulnerable group food distribution programme in Eswatini have revealed several major
problems. First, the administrative and logistical difficulties of purchasing and distributing large amounts
of food has meant that eligible households have not received food on time or in sufficient quantities, and
that considerable funds have been spent on overheads at the expense of transfers. Second, the
appropriateness and quality of some food items provided has been questioned. Third, over-registration
has meant that the programme has been poorly targeted. This has arisen because efforts to distinguish
between the poor and the non-poor households in some drought affected areas have been inadequate.
Fourth, there has been concern that food has gone rotten or missing in transit. Fifth, there is a suspicion
that food aid in general has a negative influence by creating dependency amongst beneficiaries, and by
damaging private sector food retailers. In short, the Government and NGOs have faced challenges in
delivering efficient food distribution programmes in time of drought.
16

--- Page 17 ---
2.7.2 Livestock, Crop and Water Relief Programmes
During past drought relief programmes, a central component has been support to livestock owners
through a range of programmes. These have included fodder and lick subsidies, a marketing incentive
scheme, support to transport cattle and lease grazing. In addition to the household food security
programmes outlined above, communal-tenure crop farmers have been provided with subsidized
agricultural inputs for the new planting season. In the past, water supply schemes were initiated in
response to drought in order to meet emergency needs in a number of respects. This meant diversion of
scarce resources to implement water supply schemes, initiated under drought relief programmes.
17

--- Page 18 ---
CHAPTER 3: LEGISLATIVE AND INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK
3.1 Related Policies, Legislation, Strategic Plans and Programmes
Eswatini has various existing plans and policies aimed to enhance water security, reduce risks associated
with natural disasters, conserve natural resources, increase national wealth and increase the nation’s
resilience to climate change. All these instruments are directly relevant to national drought planning and
risk reduction. It is important to identify within these plans and policies the parts that will help the country
to directly or indirectly better prepare for and reduce the risk of drought. The key policies which are
relevant to drought preparation and risk reduction include the following:
● The National Development Strategy (NDS) Vision 2022.
● The Poverty Reduction Strategic and Action Plan (2007-2015)
● The National Food and Nutrition Security Policy and Action Plan
● National Disaster Management Act (2006)
● National Disaster Risk Management Policy (2010)
● The Swaziland Disaster Resilience Strategy and Action Plan (2017)
● National Emergency Response, Mitigation and Adaptation Plan 2016-2022,
● The Swaziland Environment Action Plan (SEAP);
● Water Management Policies and Act
● Eswatini Multi-Hazard Contingency Plans
● Climate Change and Disaster Risk Reduction
● National Climate Change Policy (2016)
● National Biodiversity and Action Plan-2 (2018)
● National Agricultural Research Policy (2013)
● National Irrigation Policy (2005)
● Urban Government Act (1969)
3.1.1 National Development Strategy: Vision 2022
The National Development Strategy (NDS) – Vision 2022 is the overarching framework that guides all
socio- economic interventions in Eswatini. It broadly focuses on improving the standard of living in the
country, particularly as it relates to poverty eradication, employment creation, gender equality and
environmental protection. While the NDS does not directly address drought, it is incorporated in the
strategic areas related to physical infrastructure, agriculture, land and rural development, education and
training, health and social welfare, and gender and disadvantaged groups. The Government of Eswatini
(GoE) recognizes that drought mitigation is an integral component of realizing this vision. Drought
mitigation is closely aligned with Eswatini’s NDS since both promote poverty eradication; employment
creation; gender equity; social integration and environmental protection.
3.1.2 The National Disaster Management Act (2006)
The National Disaster Management Act of 2006 establishes the institutional framework for DRR. In line
with the Eswatini Disaster Management Act, the Eswatini Disaster Risk Reduction National Action Plan
(2008-2015) has the following five objectives, to:
18

--- Page 19 ---
● Create an effective and functional legal and institutional framework on DRR,
● Improve risk identification mechanisms in the country,
● Enhance information and knowledge management for disaster risk management,
● Improve national risk management applications for poverty and disaster risk reduction, and
● Establish / strengthen disaster preparedness and emergency response practices.
The drafting of the Eswatini national drought plan is guided by the existing disaster management policy
and Act, hence it supports improved drought management through the use of the existing disaster
management structures.
3.1.3 The National Emergency Response, Mitigation and Adaptation (2016- 2022).
This plan directly supports the NDP since it was developed in response to the devastating 2014-2016 El
Nino induced drought. It is coordinated by the NDMA, and establishes the foundation for adaptation to
drought. It utilizes a sectoral approach which ensures that each sector develops a plan and participates
in its implementation. This creates a relevant platform for implementing the NDP.
3.1.4 National Disaster Management Plan
The NDMP is a multi-sectoral plan that acknowledges the risks arising from the impacts of hazards and
disasters on various sectors which include water resource management, agriculture and land use
planning, health and education. The development of Integrated Climate-Resilient Flood Management
Strategies and the implementation of water management interventions in catchment and urban areas is
key to the success of the NDMP.
3.1.5 The National Disaster Management Policy (2010)
This policy framework aims to change the approach to and the nature of Disaster Risk Management in
Eswatini. Specifically, in recognition of the country’s changing disaster profile, it sets down the
requirements for the institutionalization of Disaster Risk Management in Eswatini on a cost effective,
permanent and sustainable basis.
3.1.7 Swaziland Environmental Action Plan
The development of the Swaziland Environmental Action Plan (SEAP) was facilitated by the Eswatini
Environment Authority (EEA) using a participatory approach which involved all sectors and different levels
of the Eswatini community. Through the EEA, the importance of integrating environmental concerns into
the national development planning process for the country is highlighted. The NDP aligns with the SEAP
in that it will: i) assist policy and decision-makers and the general public in understanding drought
impacts and their implications for natural resource and environmental management; and ii) enhance the
technical and institutional capacity of Eswatini to integrate drought concerns into national planning and
development. The SEAP has priorities in hydrology and water resources (fresh water), forestry and
agriculture. The national plans for drought mitigation and adaptation are considered as priorities for the
country, as well as vulnerability assessments for the identification of adaptation options.
3.1.8 National Climate Change Policy
19

--- Page 20 ---
The goal of the National Climate Change Policy (NCCP) is to support the development of a sustainable,
climate-resilient and inclusive low-carbon green growth economy. In line with the objectives of the NCCP,
the NDP will: i) promote and implement an integrated, climate-resilient catchment management
approach; ii) enhance coordination of climate and drought risk response at the national and sub national
levels; iv) disseminate information to improve awareness of drought risks to the public; and v) establish
long-term drought mitigation plans and strategies.
3.1.9 National Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan
This plan is a roadmap to support greater integration of climate change and its associated impacts into
Eswatini’s national development. It contributes to drought resilience by seeking to: i) improve national
capacity for climate change integration, adaptation and mitigation; ii) create an environment that will
empower vulnerable communities to actively participate in uplifting their living standards; iii) strengthen
partnerships among national structures and stakeholders ; and iv) create an enabling environment
through technical assistance, workshops and meetings.
3.1.10 Nationally Determined Contributions
Eswatini’s Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC’s) highlights the steps for the country to reduce GHG
emissions and to adapt to climate change. These contributions will assist the NDP by i) providing lessons
learned for the development and implementation of a National Climate Change Adaptation Plan (NAP); ii)
scaling up investments in restoring and maintaining ecological infrastructure; iii) establishing effective
long term catchment management; and iv) developing systems to integrate water resource management
across all sectors.
3.1.11 Gender Policy (2009)
The Gender Policy in line with the constitution provides for gender equality. Several strategies have been
put in place to support this policy since Eswatini is a signatory to a number of international conventions
and agreements that have a bearing on gender equality and equity. These initiatives are aimed at
addressing the inequitable access to education, reducing the skewed exposure of women to poverty due
to their low participation in the formal employment sector, improving women’s access to land and
confronting gender-based violence, which is a major problem affecting mainly women and children. In
addition, several pieces of legislation have been initiated or subjected to reviews in support of the above,
including the Marriage Act; the Sexual Offenses and Domestic Violence Bill; and the draft Land Policy and
the Deeds and Registry Act. The NDP is related to these initiatives since they indirectly reduce the
vulnerability of women and children to drought impacts.
3.2 Relevant Regional and International Policy Framework
Eswatini has a number of existing plans and policies aimed to enhance water security, reduce risks
associated with natural disasters, conserve natural resources, increase national wealth, and increase the
nation’s resilience to climate change – all of which are directly relevant to national drought planning and
risk reduction. It is important to identify within these plans and policies the parts that will directly or
indirectly better prepare for and reduce the risk of drought. The NDP is also aligned to two regional
20

--- Page 21 ---
initiatives, namely; the strategic framework called “Drought Resilience and Prepared Africa (DRAPA)” and
the “Regional Inter-Agency Standing Committee for Southern Africa” (RIASCO) Action Plan. It is also linked
to the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030, which was adopted at the Third UN
World Conference in Sendai, Japan on March 18, 2015 and the Windhoek Declaration (2016).
3.3 Drought Management in Eswatini
The Government of Eswatini has the ultimate mandate and responsibility to lead and coordinate all
national disaster preparedness and response actions to prevent and mitigate the effects of disasters.
Under the DPMO the NDMA is the Agency that coordinates Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR) and Disaster
Risk Management (DRM) programmes. The NDMA thus assumes the role of Inter-Cluster coordinator of
the National Multi-Hazard Contingency Plan. The relevant Government Sector Ministries/Departments
have focal points who assist the NDMA in coordinating and managing all issues pertaining to DRM in line
with the Disaster Management Act (2006) and Disaster Risk Management Policy (2010). Other
stakeholders are described below: Other role players are presented in the table below:
Table 1: Role player in Eswatini Drought Risk Reduction and Mitigation
ENTITY ROLE
Government of Eswatini The government of Eswatini has the ultimate mandate and
responsibility to lead and coordinate all national disaster
preparedness and response actions to prevent and mitigate the
effects of disasters. Under DPMO the NDMA is the overall national
coordinator of Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR) and Disaster Risk
Management (DRM) programmes.
The NDMA The NDMA coordinates the different DRR clusters in line with the
Disaster Management Act (2006) and Disaster Risk Management
Policy (2010).
The National Committee on Multi-sector involvement/engagement was undertaken through
Multi-Hazard Contingency the Multi-Hazard Contingency Plan (MHCP). The MHCP is led,
Planning (MHCP). coordinated and managed through the NDMA Clusters
Civil Society In the context of an expanded humanitarian country partnership,
civil society organizations such as Red Cross, World Vision
Eswatini, Nazarene Compassionate Ministries and Save the
Children play a vital role in DRR coordination and implementation
of DRR activities.
The United Nations Country Under the guidance of the UNRC, the United Nations Country
Team (UNCT) Team (UNCT) is responsible for effective and efficient
implementation of Inter-Agency disaster risk management
activities. It provides overall leadership to the cluster planning,
response and recovery and for initiating dialogue with the
Government and donors. The UN Agencies serve as the Core Lead
Agencies and work closely with their relevant counterpart Lead
21

--- Page 22 ---
Agencies in Government.
The National Emergency The National Emergency Preparedness and Response Unit Is
Preparedness and Response responsible for providing leadership and coordination on health
Unit emergencies, providing emergency medical/ambulance service,
shaping the health emergency research agenda, setting norms
and standards, articulating evidence-based policy options for
disaster risk management for health, monitoring disease
outbreaks and assessing performance of health system during
emergencies.
The Multi-sector involvement Since 2013 a multi-sector involvement on DRM has been
/ Engagement Committee undertaken through the Multi-Hazard Contingency Plan (MHCP).
This body is coordinated and managed through an Inter-
Cluster/Sector arrangement with the relevant Government
Agency serving as the Lead Agency and the United Nations or
relevant NGO Agency as Core Lead Agency.
The Eswatini Vulnerability This Body collects household level information to assess levels of
Assessment Committee (VAC) chronic food insecurity, malnutrition, livelihoods and vulnerability
in rural households in all regions of the country. It builds the
capacity of core Swazi VAC members to undertake integrated food
security and vulnerability analyses of household survey data.
The Eswatini Meteorological The Eswatini Meteorological Service issues seasonal forecast and
Service (EMS) sensitize farmers on the importance and the use of the forecast
for planning.
The Department of Water The DWA monitors hydro-meteorological indicators and issues
Affairs (DWA) drought related information
The National Early Warning The NEWU conducts food supply assessment in conjunction with
Unit (NEWU) other stakeholders, provide advice on food supply policies, gather,
analyze and disseminate information on food security issues,
provide early warning information on the expected weather
conditions and crop production in liaison with the Department of
Meteorological Services. The unit further liaises with regional and
international bodies on issues of food security that have a bearing
on the local food security context.
3.4 Challenges Facing Disaster Risk Management in Eswatini
The Disaster Management Act of 2006, and the Disaster Risk Management Policy (2010) are in place,
however their implementation has not been optimal due to the factors described below. As a result of
these limitations, drought response and management in Eswatini is generally reactive and in terms of
crisis management; known to be untimely; poorly coordinated and disintegrated; poorly targeted and
response often lacks a scientific basis.
a. Coordination Complexities
The Act has complex management structures and thus coordination needs can grow exponentially, at the
22

--- Page 23 ---
risk of duplication. Most of the organs created by the act are not in place except for the NDMA. The
National Action Plan (NAP) 2008-2015 was adopted by cabinet. However, due to NDMA institutional
constraints, the NAP lacks a coherent systematic coordination and management in terms of its
implementation. The national DRM policy (2010) was adopted, however it has not been operationalized
since its adoption. The policy lacks a coherent strategy for its operationalization. Further, there is need to
review and align the Disaster Management Act and Disaster Risk Management Policy with the aim of
promoting efficacy in DRM interventions in the country at various institutional levels. There is weak
mainstreaming of DRR into National Development plans, sector plans and budgets which translates into
lack of ownership of DRR initiatives.
b. Slow Rate of Decentralization of DRR
The Disaster Management Act (2006) is designed along the premise of decentralization and delegation of
powers, for effective and timely delivery of relief in disaster emergency situations. It calls for the
establishment of regional disaster management committees.
The Act mandates all four Regional Administrators to establish a Regional Disaster Management
Committee to be chaired by the Regional Secretary or a person appointed by that Regional Secretary, the
composition of such committees are also defined in the Act. The functions of the Committee shall include:
(i) reviewing Regional Disaster Management Policies and Plans and ensuring that they address the
requirements for Disaster Management, including risk assessment, prevention, preparedness, rescue,
evacuation, relief, recovery, rehabilitation and reconstruction measures at the regional level; (ii) making
recommendations to the Minister, the Regional Administrator and the National Disaster Management;
facilitating the implementation of Disaster Management Programmes and procedures at Regional,
Inkhundla and Community level by the Agency and role players, etc. Three out of four Regional Disaster
Management Committees have been established and trained on DRR issues, however, more work is still
required to strengthen the capacity of Regional Disaster Management Committees to effectively execute
their mandate.
Similarly, the Urban Government Act (1969) provides that, all urban local authorities should develop
Integrated Development Plans (IDP) which constitutes components like disaster management and
environmental sustainability plan. However, there is a need to strengthen the effectiveness of disaster
management component from the IDPs.
However, the NDMA has not yet devolved at regional, urban and community levels, and thereby affecting
its ability to coordinate DRR/M at these levels (UNDP, 2014). According to the National Multi-Hazard
Planning (MHP) Progress Report (2013) there is weak Capacity of Urban Local Government Authorities to
plan for and implement DRR agenda. Currently, there only three (out of thirteen) municipalities that have
committed to the mainstreaming of DRR through development of contingency plans. There is a need to
establish DRM structures at regional and local levels and strengthen local urban government capacity in
disaster risk reduction, emergency preparedness and response as well as climate change adaptation and
mitigation.
c. Inadequate Capacity within Key DRR Institutions
Key drought institutions such as the NDMA, NEWU an EMS have staff shortages and weak capacity to
23

--- Page 24 ---
provide effective leadership, coordination and management of DRR and management interventions in the
country. Currently none of the urban areas meet the risk reduction preparedness benchmark standards,
given their development services to the national socio-economic development.
Inadequate skilled and qualified personnel. Not all weather stations have officers deployed to run them.
There are limited capacities in government technical units to produce and analyse data that would
contribute to a proper risk assessment.
No continuous data sets from meteorological service. Since the stations are insufficiently manned, there
are difficulties in having observations carried out over the weekends. There is also frequent breakdown
of the functioning of weather stations and most of the time they are not fixed in time hence gaps are
recorded in data sets series.
The country needs to address the challenges highlighted in the sections above by:
Closing these gaps and inconsistencies in the national institutional framework by reviewing and
harmonizing the Act and the policy. This includes review of Disaster Management Act (2006) as well as
development of action plans for operationalizing DRM Policy through a review of the Disaster Risk
Reduction National Action Plan in order to take into consideration new emerging issues.
Establishment of DRM structures at regional and local levels and strengthen local urban government
capacity in DRR, EPR as well as climate change adaptation and mitigation.
Establishment of a National Platform to strengthen DRR and Emergency Preparedness coordination
mechanisms which would facilitate coordination across sectors. It would further facilitate the integration
of DRR into national policies, sector plans, as well as into international or bilateral development aid
policies and programs. Due consideration of the additional resources needed to provide secretariat
support to the National Platform would be given in the process.
d. Weak Early Warning Systems
In addition, the early warning ‘system’ (EWS) limitedly focuses on one sector, agriculture, and does not
adequately involve most functions of a EWS. Effort to improve transfer and facilitate exchange of relevant
information within the country remains essential. The Eswatini Meteorological Department (MET), which
is the main recipient and provider of hazard data to national counterparts, requires further capacity
strengthening to input information, process and issue more timely warnings.
In addition, the system does not incorporate mechanisms for turning scientific/technical information on
weather from the National Early Warning Unit (NEWU) into risk scenarios, for developing warning
messages (such as evacuate in the face of potential floods/fires/hail storms) keyed to those scenarios,
and, for transmitting those messages to communities at risk.
e. Weak Communication and Collaboration
The country also experiences weak communication and collaboration between producers, managers and
users of EW information. The EWS is fragmented with little synergy and collaboration across sectors. There
is an urgent need for effective communication and collaboration between producers of weather and
24

--- Page 25 ---
climate information and users in order to empower farmers, individuals and communities under threat
from natural and other hazards to take effective and timely measures to protect lives, property and the
environment from the effects of disasters. The improved communication would form a basis for nation-
wide and regional initiatives against climate change-induced disasters.
f. Lack of Comprehensive Drought Risk Assessment
There is no up-to-date comprehensive disaster risk profile for the country, however individual institutions
do conduct risk assessment ad-hoc in a non-coherent manner and is not comprehensive. The country
needs to conduct proper risk assessments in all its four regions of in order to compile a comprehensive
risk profile. This will serve as guidance to influence decision-making in terms of mainstreaming DRR into
the development processes.
g. Inadequate Mainstreaming of Gender in DRR
Disaster risk is not gender-neutral. Studies have shown that women and girls are disproportionately
impacted by disasters and other social issues such as HIV/AIDS in Eswatini. Most of the affected people
during the 2015/16 drought were women due to socially-constructed gender roles that determine what
norms and behaviours are acceptable for women and men, and girls and boys. In particular, women tend
to take responsibility for home-based tasks and work harder to protect their agricultural assets in the case
of drought and famine. A gender-sensitive approach would identify how disasters affect men, women,
boys and girls differently and shape policy that addresses people's specific vulnerabilities, concerns and
needs.
h. Weak Protocols for Collecting and Managing DRR Information
The country’s protocols for collecting, management, use and storage of DRR information are weak due to
the following:
i. Poor dissemination and access to data and information:
There is need for effective communication and collaboration between data and information
producers and users in order to empower communities under threat from natural and other
hazards to take effective and timely decision-making to protect lives, property and the
environment from the effects of disasters. The National Early Warning Unit focuses on agriculture
and food security which is a limitation on the type of hazards to be monitored.
ii. Absence of a centralized database on previous disaster events and impacts:
Historical information and previous disaster events are not yet stored in a centralized database
managed by the NDMA. There is no aggregation or analysis done, and detailed maps do not exist.
Baseline data on disaster incidents and vulnerability are not available to measure improvement.
iii. Absence of systematic data collection and Information management for DRR:
Data collection is considered as a challenge due to lack of tools, funding, staff and competencies.
Therefore, most data collection is initiated as part of specific projects carried out by UN Agencies,
NGOs or other International Organizations. Data collection is often halted once the projects end,
25

--- Page 26 ---
and in most cases it does not constitute a nation-wide effort.
iv. Lack of continuous data sets:
There are difficulties in having consistent observations carried out such as over the weekends due
to resources constraints. There is also reported frequent breakdown of the functioning of weather
stations and most of the time they are not fixed in time hence gaps are recorded in data sets series.
The country needs to establish a solid national risk observatory, which would continuously collect
and analyze data from relevant agencies, coordinate and/or disseminate early warnings, and serve
as a communications hub. The National Risk Observatory would unify the disparate databases of
various agencies.
v. Lack of a Centralized Disaster Loss Register.
There is need for a centralized database system that will capture and quantify all disaster
incidences into financial values so as to establish trends, and compare the impact of the hazards
over the years.
j. Financing Constraints
Eswatini Government is supporting DRR activities in the country through budget allocation to the NDMA
and provision of resources during disasters for emergency response activities. The Annual budget for
Disaster Response in Eswatini during the period 2009 to 2012 is inadequate and limited. As a result,
activities for disaster preparedness have been limited.
There is no budget properly dedicated to DRR in line ministries and at Regional level. It was recognized
that in part this was due to fiscal constraints faced by the government budget, as well as the need for
stronger capacities in advocating for resources supported by clear rationale. The existing Emergency Fund
under NDMA is used mainly to respond to emergencies and disasters when they occur.
3.5 Proposed Coordination of the National Drought Plan
The NDMA will coordinate the implementation of actions outlined in the NDP, while the MoA will serve
as the Secretariat. The Ministry of Agriculture has responsibility to report to the UNCCD on drought
management in Eswatini. The National Disaster Management Agency (NDMA) is the national institution
that is mandated to coordinate disaster risk reduction (DRR) in Eswatini.
Since Eswatini already has a robust DRR/DRM coordination structure in place, it will not be necessary to
create a separate Drought National Committee to oversee the implementation of the NDP. Instead, the
existing institutional arrangements for handling drought under the National Disaster Risk Management
Committee, which is chaired by the DPM, is best suited to fast trek the NDP. This committee includes
representation from line Ministries and several non-governmental organizations, as a national policy
making and coordinating body. It is supported by the Disaster Management Unit in the Office of the
Deputy Prime Minister which acts as its Secretariat, and the Early Warning Unit which provides
information on the status of food production and stocks in the country. It is proposed that the
composition of current National Disaster Risk Management Committee (NDRMC) be reviewed to ensure
adequate representation of drought practitioners, targeting Senior Officer from the following sectors:
26

--- Page 27 ---
● National Disaster Management Agency (NDMA)
● Deputy Prime Minister’s Office (DPMO)
● DPMO /Department of Social Welfare
● Ministry of Tourism and Environmental Affairs/ Meteorological Department
● Ministry Public Works and Transport / Housing Department
● Ministry of Health- EPR Ministry of Agriculture
● Ministry of Information, Communications & Technology
● Ministry of Economic Planning and Development
● Ministry of Tinkhundla Administration and Development
● Ministry of Housing and Urban Development
● Ministry of Natural Resources and Energy (MNRE) / Department of Water
● Ministry of Natural Resources and Energy (MNRE) / Department of Energy
● Eswatini Environmental Authority
● World Food Programme (WFP)
● Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations
● United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
● Coalition Assembly of Non-Governmental Organizations (CANGO)
● Business Eswatini
● Baphalali Eswatini Red Cross Society
● Eswatini Local Government Association
In addition, units that exist within the MoA (NEWU), MTEA (EMS), and MNRE (DWA) should be
strengthened to ensure that the provisions of this NDP with regard to weather information, agriculture
and water programmes are implemented.
Coordinating functions related to drought-recovery programmes and long-term drought mitigation
programmes will be the responsibility of the NDMA, supported by Food Security Technical Committee
under the FAO and WFP, as well as other national coordinating structures such as the National Focal Points
for the UNFCCC, UNCCD and the UNCBD.
At the Regional and Tinkhundla levels, responsibility for drought emergency management currently
resides with Regional Disaster Management Committees. These structure are well suited for local level
drought coordination, however they need to be strengthened, in line with the Government’s
Decentralization Policy which calls for a strengthening of local involvement in development activities. As
such, they are in a good position to deal with emergency management, recovery, and long term drought
mitigation programmes in a holistic manner. During the disaster drought emergency phase, they are
directed at a national level by the DPMO, and directly supported by the NDMA, while otherwise they will
work in cooperation with other National bodies, including the Food Security and Nutrition Council, the
National Land Use and Environment Authority, and the line Ministries. During non-emergency phases,
government should continue supporting local structures in terms of capacity strengthening and
preparedness to deal with future drought emergencies. The proposed organogram for implementing the
Eswatini National Drought Plan is presented in section 9.1
27

--- Page 28 ---
CHAPTER 4: DROUGHT MONITORING, FORECASTING & IMPACT
ASSESSMENT
Eswatini needs to adopt a proactive approach to drought management and that requires monitoring
drought using a consistent set of indicators to identify when drought is occurring, its extent, and when it
is ending. Monitoring reduces the chance of surprises and gives time for planning and implementing
drought mitigation strategies. Monitoring also provide continuous feedback to government decision
makers to determine when and where to implement preparation and response actions.
Being able to forecast droughts allows for advance warnings that help sectors and organizations prepare
for the adverse effects of drought. An impact assessment methodology is important for the Government
of Eswatini to identify the sectors of the economy and society more likely to be adversely affected by
drought.
Without an effective drought monitoring and early warning system to deliver timely information for early
action, effective impact assessment procedures, pro-active risk management measures, preparedness
plans aimed at increasing the coping capacity, and effective emergency response programmes directed at
reducing the impacts of drought, the Eswatini will continue to respond to drought in a reactive, crisis
management approach.
This chapter describes some of the tools and systems available to the Government of Eswatini for
monitoring, forecasting and assessing impacts of drought
4.1 Drought Monitoring Indicators
Many indicators are available for monitoring the main types of drought - meteorological, agricultural,
ecological, social and hydrological. The UNCCD Technical Guidelines to support its Drought Resilience,
Adaptation and Management Policy (DRAMP) Framework (Crossman 2017) identifies ten indicators for
meteorological drought, one indicator for hydrological drought and three indicators for agricultural
drought. Data inputs required for these 14 indicators include a mix of rainfall, temperature,
evapotranspiration, soil available water holding capacity and stream flow. The DRAMP Technical
Guidelines also list nine remotely sensed indicators (mostly related to vegetation stress) and five modelled
/ composite indicators that use multiple data inputs. Choosing an indicator is determined by specific
national circumstances, such as availability of spatio-temporal data, technical capacity and the nuances
of the climatic, social, economic and environmental conditions.
Ideally a drought monitoring indicator would include spatial data on evapotranspiration and soil attributes
to get a more complete picture of circumstances within agriculture in Eswatini. However, real time and/or
regular collection of this information is expensive especially in a small developing country characterized
by complex topography and a low GDP, like Eswatini. Rainfall-based indicators are a good basis for
monitoring drought given that drought is an exceptional lack of water as compared to the expected
normal (Carrão et al. 2016, Van Loon et al. 2016) and extended rainfall deficits cause agricultural,
hydrological and/or socioeconomic disasters. Therefore rainfall indicators can be used as proxies for
agricultural and hydrological drought (Vicente-Serrano et al. 2012).
28

--- Page 29 ---
There are only five meteorological stations geographically dispersed across Eswatini, which limits the
country’s ability to collect representative data to make accurate weather predictions. Within this
limitation Eswatini needs to adopt a practical pragmatic approach in selecting indicators that can be used
to monitor drought in future. Through a partnership that exists between the NDMA and University of
Nebraska (USA), three common and accessible rainfall-based drought indicators have been selected for
monitoring drought in Eswatini, due to ease of observance. It is envisaged that in future a fourth indicator
(soil moisture) will be added to the drought monitor. The indicators are described below:
4.1.1 Standardised Precipitation Index (SPI)
Standardised Precipitation Index (SPI) is good indicator which expresses actual rainfall as a standardised
departure from the long-term median rainfall. The values of SPI are expressed in standard deviations, with
positive indicating greater than median rainfall and negative values indicating less than median rainfall.
SPI can be applied over different timescales (1, 3, 6, 12, 24 and 48 months) and is normalised so it is
applicable to different climates (Crossman 2017). The drought categories of SPI in the table below can be
used as triggers for implementing various levels of planning and management actions. Drought starts
when the SPI value is equal or below -1.0 and ends when the SPI value becomes positive (World
Meteorological Organization 2012).
Table 2: Probability of recurrence of drought event described by SPI. Source: World Meteorological Organization
(2012).
SPI Category Number of times in Severity of event
100 years
0 to -0.99 Mild dryness 33 1 in 3 years
-1.0 to -1.49 Moderate dryness 10 1 in 10 years
-1.5 to -1.99 Severe dryness 5 1 in 20 years
-2.0 or less Extreme dryness 2.5 1 in 50 years
4.1.2 Land Surface Temperature (LST)
Land Surface Temperature (LST) as a reliable proxy indicator of soil moisture and therefore agricultural
drought (Son et al. 2012, Perez et al. 2016). Both the Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI)
and the LST are computable from MODIS satellite sensor data which has been collecting daily observation
data at 5.6km resolution across Eswatini since 2001.
4.1.3 Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI)
The Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI) is the ratio of red to near infra-red light and can
identify whether vegetation is present and is stressed (Tucker 1979, Sellers 1985). Many studies have
found that there is a strong negative correlation between temperature (e.g. Land Surface Temperature,
LST) and NDVI during drought periods, and that a time series of LST/NDVI is a rapid indicator of drought
at country and province level in tropical areas (McVicar and Bierwirth 2001).
29

--- Page 30 ---
4.1.4 The US Drought Monitor
The US Drought Monitor serves as a good example of how a combination of different indicators can be
used to develop a drought monitor. It is a state of the art in composite indicators for drought monitoring
known as the US Drought Monitor (USDM, Svoboda et al. 2002). The full USDM combines six indicators of
drought (Palmer Drought Severity Index, soil moisture, daily stream flow, rainfall deciles, SPI and
Vegetation Health Index) that describe the major types of drought (meteorological, agricultural,
hydrological). The USDM uses weighted averages of the inputs to produce a weekly real-time assessment
of current drought conditions in the USA. The drought categories used by the USDM (table below) are
potential triggers for different levels of planning and drought management response. The thresholds of
each indicator are a useful guide for identifying triggers under each indicator in the USD.
Table 3: The USDM drought categories, possible impacts and association with input indicators.
Source: adapted from Svoboda et al. (2002)
4.2 Current Drought Monitoring in Eswatini
The Eswatini National Meteorological Services (EMS) under the Ministry of Tourism and Environmental
30

--- Page 31 ---
Affairs (MTEA) is the national meteorological Service in Eswatini, while the Department of Water Affairs
(DWA), under the Ministry of Natural resources and Energy (MNRE) is the agency responsible for
hydrological services. The EMS is mandated to provide weather, flood, climate and astronomical products
and services to promote people’s safety and well- being and contribute to national development.
The EMS runs a country-wide network of 20 meteorological stations which ensure the recording,
transmission and processing of meteorological information, according to internal needs and the directives
of the World Meteorological Organisation.
The information obtained from monitoring is used for various purposes. These include the development
of meteorological and agro-meteorological forecasts, warnings on natural meteorological phenomena,
for use in global and regional meteorological data exchange networks and climate change assessments.
The main parameters being monitored are temperature, humidity, daily sunshine hours, atmospheric
pressure, average daily wind speed, rainfall, lightning data and evaporation rates (TNA, 2016).
4.3 Development of the Eswatini Drought Monitor
With support from the World Bank and the European Union, Eswatini is currently developing a drought
monitor in order to improve the country drought resilience, mitigate drought impacts and coordinate
drought preparedness programmes and responses in an effective and efficient manner. Through this
process Eswatini will improve collaboration among stakeholders on drought information, enhance
monitoring systems and information delivery for preparedness and reduced drought impacts. It is
envisaged that this will create a proactive approach drought mitigation and planning measures, risk
management, public outreach and resource stewardship. Multiple users of the tool will be able to enhance
their network and build the necessary capacity for a more substantive and sustained drought
preparedness and resilience programme in the country.
The idea is to consolidate the indices and indicators into one comprehensive national drought map,
through a consultative process and produce a combined drought monitor for Eswatini (CDI-E), to monitor
the temporal and spatial extents of historic drought events. It is worth noting that the intention is to
provide an assessment product [by trying to capture these characteristics, the drought’s magnitude
(duration + intensity), spatial extent, probability of occurrence and impact], not a forecast.
31

--- Page 32 ---
Figure 5: The steps taken in developing a drought monitor for Eswatini (Source: NDMA)
An example of the preliminary results of the CDI-E which was developed by combining the three
satellite-based parameters (2001 to 2019) is shown in Figure 18 and 16 below:
Figure 6: CDI-E measurements taken using 2009 data (source: NDMA).
The tool will assist the decision making process in a number of ways such as assessment of current
conditions and current impacts using precipitation and other parameter to incorporate to other key
32

--- Page 33 ---
information and data. The indicators and CDI-E input data are objective parameters, which can be
validated physically for decision making on onset of drought.
The CDI-E will assist in multi-hazard risk assessment for developing detailed country risk profiles and
maps, and updating disaster management strategies and action plans based on identified risks. It can
also assist in undertaking a drought preparedness Cost Benefits analysis and costs of inaction
assessment.
It will also facilitate data integration through a team of experts, inputs from community based national
volunteers for drought monitoring and national weather stations. Integrated data can be used in a number
of ways such as supporting the development and implementing the drought monitor in order to prepare
and update multi-sectoral drought preparedness and contingency plans; undertaking comprehensive risk
transfer and finance strategy for the country and capacity building to support strategic management of
water resources, drought and disaster risks, and climate change, including strategic partnerships with
international institutions and expert.
Figure 7: CDI-E measurements taken using 2019 data ( Source: NDMA).
4.4 Drought Impact Assessment
Drought can have many different effects on different sectors, hence impact assessments are required to
33

--- Page 34 ---
quantify the consequences of a drought on the different sectors of society and the economy. The potential
impacts to the major sectors in Eswatini are listed in the Table 4 below. This sections summarizes the
importance of each of these major sectors to the Eswatini economy and society, and how they have been
impacted in the past by drought.
4.5 Drought Impact Reporting
Detecting drought impacts early can help to prevent the drought turning into a humanitarian crisis
because drought response actions can be implemented swiftly before the situation deteriorates.
Collection of anecdotal data on drought impacts provides an early and, when complemented with
technical information such as drought indices and forecasting, can create a comprehensive
understanding of losses caused by drought. Anecdotal information can include word of mouth, media
reports, photographs, food and water market activity and citizen science. Some of the key information
is available from women and youth.
Table 4: Potential drought impacts for the major sectors in Eswatini. (Source: adapted from One World One
Water (2017))
Agriculture and commerce Water supply Public health, environment
and safety
• Loss from crop production • Groundwater depletion • Mental and physical stress
• Loss from livestock and • Reservoir draw down • Health-related water
dairy production • Water quality declines shortage problems (water
• Loss from fishery (increased salinity) contamination, diminished
production • Disruption of water sewage flows)
• Income loss for farmers supplies • Increased conflicts
• Unemployment from • Increased surface water • Increased wildfire risk and
drought-related depletion severity
production declines • Increased conflicts over • Disruption to cultural
• Loss to tourism industry water use belief systems
• Declines in food • Mental and physical stress • Loss of aesthetic values
production • Reduced quality of life and • Reduction in recreational
• Cost of water transport changes in lifestyle activities
• Reduced economic • Depleted rainwater • Reduced quality of life and
development catchment and storage for changes in lifestyle
• Mental and physical stress residents without water • Population migration
• Reduced quality of life and service • Damage to biodiversity
changes in lifestyle • Increased costs for water and ecosystem
• Population migration hauling for residents degradation
without water service • Loss of wetlands
• Coral bleaching and
marine habitat
degradation
34

--- Page 35 ---
CHAPTER 5: DROUGHT RISK AND VULNERABILITY
The Kingdom of Eswatini is particularly vulnerable to drought as a developing country in which a significant
portion of the population is reliant on subsistence farming for their daily sustenance and livelihoods. The
ability to adapt to and cope with natural disasters, including drought, depends on economic resources,
infrastructure, technology and social safety nets - many of which are typically lacking in Eswatini (TNC,
2016). Furthermore, the country is under pressure due to rapid urbanization and resource depletion,
making it even more vulnerable to the additional challenges resulting from drought. Thus the Resilience
Strategy and Adaptation Plan for Eswatini (2017) identifies poverty and food insecurity, HIV and AIDS,
weakened governance, development-generated factors, and the fragile environment as the major sources
of vulnerability to disaster risk, including drought.
Drought risk assessment is a core activity for establishing an effective drought monitoring and early
warning system. A risk assessment provides important information for setting priorities and developing
actions that prevent drought and mitigate drought impacts. The drought risk assessment can be used by
authorities to target drought preparedness, mitigation and crises response actions to those communities
and sectors most vulnerable to drought, and in locations where the impacts of drought are currently or
forecast to be most severe. Outputs from a drought risk assessment should be incorporated into land use
and rural development planning, health care systems, environmental and natural resource management
approaches, supply chains and business models, and non- agricultural sectors.
Thus, understanding and assessing drought risk is essential, as some sectors, population groups or regions
can be more vulnerable than others or vulnerable in different ways. Accordingly, the NDP has attempted
to carry out risk assessments in a consistent and coordinated manner.
This chapter introduces the concepts of risk and vulnerability and compiles information for assessing risk
and vulnerability to drought in Eswatini. Risk assessment outputs are provided from a global study
completed by the European Commission’s Joint Research Centre (Carrão et al. 2016). These are
complemented by several studies completed by national organizations that have assessed components of
risk in Eswatini.
5.1 Definitions
Drought risk and vulnerability assessments are inextricably linked, with the latter being a subset of the
former. A drought risk assessment extends the vulnerability assessment by including information
about the drought hazard independent of the sectors and communities potentially impacted by
drought.
Drought risk can be calculated as:
Drought risk = Vulnerability (V) x Hazard (H)
Where vulnerability (V) is calculated as described below, and hazard (H) is the likelihood of drought
35

--- Page 36 ---
occurrence calculated using the indicators and indices developed for the drought monitoring and
early warning system (see Chapter 5).
Vulnerability can be calculated as:
Vulnerability (V) = Exposure (E) + Sensitivity (S) – Adaptive Capacity (AC)
Where exposure (E) is the degree to which communities and ecosystems experience stress from drought
(Adger 2004), sensitivity (S) is the degree to which communities and ecosystems are modified or affected
by perturbations (Adger 2006), such as a change in climatic conditions brought about by the onset of
drought, and adaptive capacity (AC) is the ability of communities and ecosystems to evolve in order to
accommodate environmental hazards or policy change and to expand the range of variability with which
it can cope (Adger 2006), including the ability to take advantage of opportunities, or to cope with the
consequences (Füssel and Klein 2006).
Completing a drought risk and vulnerability assessment is important for several reasons (Crossman, 2017):
a. Identifying the communities and sectors that are at risk from a drought so that drought
management plans, policies and risk mitigation measures can then be effectively designed,
tailored and prioritized toward those at greatest risk. This is a pre-cursor to developing drought
preparedness, monitoring, early warning response systems.
b. It is an important learning and knowledge gathering exercise that can improve the
understanding of human and natural processes that add to drought vulnerability and
community resilience. Providing important insights into community groups that may be
marginalized such as women, children, the elderly and sick, the landless, and indigenous
communities.
5.2 Drought Risk Mapping by the European Commission Joint Research Centre
A drought risk assessment was completed by the Joint Research Centre of the European Commission for
the period 2000-2014. It uses a global-scale top-down data driven approach that is consistent and
applicable to all regions in the world. Drought risk is calculated as the probability of harmful
consequences or likelihood of losses resulting from interactions between drought hazard (i.e. the
possible future occurrence of drought events), drought exposure (i.e. the total population, its livelihoods
and assets in an area in which drought events may occur), and drought vulnerability (i.e. the propensity
of exposed elements to suffer adverse effects when impacted by a drought event) (Carrão et al. 2016).
Specifically, drought risk was calculated as:
Drought risk = Vulnerability x Hazard x Exposure
Each component of drought risk was calculated independently of each other and based on global- sale
indicators of different spatial resolutions. Hazard was using historical sequences of monthly
precipitation deficits for the period between 1901 and 2010. Exposure was computed at the sub-
national level using high spatial resolution gridded indicators of population and livestock density, crop
cover and baseline water stress. Vulnerability was derived from a combination of factors of social,
economic and infrastructural indicators.
36

--- Page 37 ---
5.3 Assessing Drought Vulnerability
Vulnerability assessments undertaken by the VAC should be integrative and comprehensive and
incorporate different dimensions (e.g. social, economic, physical, environmental, and institutional). An
elegant framework for calculating vulnerability of a system (e.g. people, communities, sectors) to drought
is presented in the figure below. Variables describing drought, such as spatial extent, probability of
occurrence (from historic drought events), projected frequencies under climate change, and intensity are
often used to estimate exposure. The NDP therefore establishes the framework for estimating sensitivity,
variables describing the system of interest (e.g. agriculture), such as dependency on water resources,
extent of land degradation, population densities, and diversification of income sources. For estimating
adaptive capacity, variables describing the five capitals (natural, social, human, financial, manufactured).
The variables used to describe exposure, sensitivity and the adaptive capacity of the Eswatini’s social,
human, financial, manufactured and natural capital would ideally be spatially explicit and high resolution.
Figure 8: The conceptual framework showing the multiple dimensions to be included for assessing vulnerability
to drought. Modified from Gbetibouo et al. (2010)6.4 Data Collected for Drought Risk Assessment
Eswatini is mainly affected by hydro meteorological hazards, and the monitoring of these hazards is the
responsibility of established institution such as Eswatini Meteorological Service. The Eswatini Vulnerability
Assessment Committee (VAC) collects household level information to assess levels of chronic food
insecurity, malnutrition, livelihoods and drought vulnerability in rural households in all regions of the
country. It undertakes integrated food security and vulnerability analyses of households. Currently
Eswatini uses a multi-sector approach to conduct disaster risk assessments (including drought) and uses
that information for planning. However, there is no standardized tool that is being used to conduct the
assessments by the various sectors, hence the country is developing standardized tools for assessment at
the onset of a disaster targeting the household and institutional level.
37

--- Page 38 ---
The National Disaster Management Agency: Acts as the central repository for assessment tools and
reports and handles all issues pertaining to disaster risk reduction from preparedness, response,
mitigation and recovery. This institution plays a coordination role among the role players stated below:
The Department of Meteorology: has the mandate: to collect weather and climate (meteorological) data,
to issue forecasts, to provide advisory for monitoring meteorological systems, to ensure that observing
standards are met, instruments are calibrated and Eswatini participates in the international community,
etc. The department regularly issues early warning information regarding storms, lightning, heat waves,
cold waves and other weather related hazards in a timely manner. The major limitation of the early
warning information / forecast provided by the Meteorology department is that it does not indicate the
frequency and the spatial distribution of the rain.
Eswatini Vulnerability Assessment Committee (EVAC): located under the NDMA pursues the main
objective of the EVAC , which is to collect household level information in order to assess levels of chronic
food insecurity, malnutrition, livelihoods and vulnerability in rural households in the four regions of the
country. Its objectives include: understanding distribution of various vulnerabilities around the country;
understanding linkages between food security, vulnerability and malnutrition in the country, using the
household survey as a baseline for developing a multi-agency, inter-sectoral monitoring system in the
country. It also aims at building the capacity of core Swazi VAC members to undertake integrated food
security and vulnerability analyses of household survey data.
National Early Warning Unit (NEWU): which is under the Ministry of Agriculture, conduct food supply
assessment in conjunction with other stakeholders, provide advice on food supply policies, gather, analyze
and disseminate information on food security issues, provide early warning information on the expected
weather conditions and crop production in liaison with the Department of Meteorological Services, liaise
with regional and international bodies on issues of food security that have a bearing on the local food
security context.
Other institutions that the coordination office works with include: the Surveyor Generals office, which
provides maps and detailed locations, the Central Statistics Office, and Emergency Preparedness and
Response Unit under the Ministry of Health. These departments deal with their risk assessment at the
sector level.
38

--- Page 39 ---
CHAPTER 6: DROUGHT COMMUNICATION AND RESPONSE ACTIONS
Effective communication of the onset of drought and the actions required to respond to drought across
all stakeholders is essential for reducing impacts. This calls for clear protocols to be put in place about
who is responsible for drought messages, where are they made, when are they are made (in response to
different drought conditions), and how to respond in the event of a drought.
All stakeholders, whether they be government agencies, private sector or the general population in the
Eswatini, have a responsibility to communicate and respond appropriately as a drought unfolds and
conditions worsen. This chapter presents specific details and actions for communicating and responding
to drought in Eswatini.
The drafting of the NDP occurred during the outbreak of the Corona Virus Pandemic which offered many
valuable lessons about communication during a disaster in Eswatini.
6.1 Drought Communication Protocol
Information and communication are critical to ensuring that drought‐affected people are at the centre of
humanitarian action during drought. It is now recognized that information and communication are
important forms of aid, in addition to traditional humanitarian aid such as food, water and shelter.
Without information and communication, affected people cannot access services or make the best
decisions for themselves and their communities. When people are given the opportunity to voice their
opinions and provide feedback, this enhances their sense of well‐being, helps them adapt to the
challenges they face, and better enables them to take an active role in their own recovery.
Traditionally, drought communication has been a one-way process of alerting communities to evolving
drought circumstances, providing advice on what they should do, and clarifying and coordinating the roles
of each of the relevant government agencies as drought evolves. This is still very important to ensure
coordination for effective response. Therefore, the communication protocol presented here is multi-
dimensional, it presents actions for opening up effective lines of communication with communities during
drought, and actions that the Government of Eswatini and communities take during and after drought.
The actions for the Government for establishing two-way communication during the phases of drought
are presented in the table below. The process of communicating actions as drought conditions evolve is
presented in the remainder of this chapter and is linked to different levels of the key indicators used to
monitor drought (see Chapter 4).
6.2 Declaration of Drought Conditions
Drought conditions in Eswatini are monitored by the NDMA, EMS and NEWU. The EMS in collaboration
with WMO and partners in the SADC region provides three main products that can be used to monitor
and forecast drought which all use the Percentage of Normal Rainfall Index (PNRI) at national scale
a) Monthly climate assessment and outlook - monthly summary of the temperature and rainfall for the
past month and a forecast of temperature and rainfall for the next month, including the weather
systems and ENSO conditions underpinning the assessment and outlook;
39

--- Page 40 ---
b) Season climate outlook - twice-yearly forecast of the temperature and rainfall for the coming two
seasons (six months), including the weather systems and ENSO conditions underpinning the outlook;
c) Monthly drought and dry spell assessments - monthly summary of drought conditions for the
previous month, issued during periods of drought.
EMS uses three categories of drought and dry spell, defined as:
1. Drought: Three consecutive months of way below normal rainfall (>60% reduction from average
rainfall), or Five consecutive months of below normal rainfall (21-60% reduction from average rainfall)
2. Dry spell: Three consecutive months of below normal rainfall (21-60% reduction from average rainfall),
or two consecutive months of way below normal rainfall (>60% reduction from average rainfall).
3. Dry condition: Two consecutive months of below normal rainfall (21-60% reduction from average
rainfall).
NDMA recently adopted the Standardized Precipitation Index (SPI), Normalized Difference Vegetation
Index (NDVI) and Land Surface Temperature (LST) anomaly for improved drought monitoring. The forum
of data experts that will refine the CDI-E monitor is expected to harmonize the indices, as the CDI-E is
finalized. The next section summaries monitoring, declaration and responses actions as the drought
worsens and the values of the SPI indicator decreases beyond certain thresholds.
6.3 Communication and Coordination Guidelines and Response Actions
6.3.1 Communication during drought
Various communication channels and tools will be used to disseminate information about drought
management in the country, which will include the following:
● Print media: Newspapers, magazines, newsletters, leaflets, brochures, pamphlets, road banners,
roll-up banners, posters, bill boards;
● Electronic media/broadcast: Radio, television, documentary, interactive website, social media.
● Direct stakeholder engagement: Interactive engagements such as meetings, workshops,
● symposia, exhibits/displays, road shows, school clubs
● Social marketing and advertising: Newspapers, radio, TV.
● Social Media Platforms: NDAM Website and accounts for Facebook, WhatsApp, Twitter etc.
The approaches for communicating with different types of Emaswati audiences and their advantages and
disadvantages are listed in the table below. It important to consider that Siswati translations, clear and
simple communication protocols in any products distributed to people vulnerable to drought is vital.
40

--- Page 41 ---
Table 5: Approaches for communicating with Emaswati and their advantages and disadvantages. Source:
modified from Government of Malawi (2014).
Target audience Communication Advantages Disadvantages
approaches
Rural communities Radios; mobile phones; Radio - reaches mass Not everyone has
posters; TV; leaflets; audience access to radios
brochures; meetings;
Mobile phones - fast Mobile phones – not
school clubs; national
everyone has access
radio stations
and coverage; require
electricity to charge
Posters – easy to Posters - prone to
distribute vandalism
Urban communities Radios; mobile phones; Radio & TV – wide Radio & TV – requires
posters; TV; leaflets; coverage electricity
brochures; meetings;
Social media – wide Social media – requires
school & sport clubs;
coverage data bundles and
social media and
modern technologies
advertising
which exclude older
(newspapers; radio; TV)
generations
Whole of Government Newspapers; television; Newspapers – easily The number of people
radios; workshops/ accessed relying on newspapers
meetings; leaflets; for news in Eswatini is
brochures; policy briefs
declining
International Newspapers; websites Social media – Websites and social
community; private & social media; press widespread among media requires data
sector; donors conferences; meetings; professional bundles, good
reports; workshops communities
connectivity and
modern technologies
which exclude older
generations
7.3.2 Coordination and Response
In response to a major drought, the Government of Eswatini, via the NDMA will lead various actions as
the drought unfolds. The responses will be coordinated under a cluster model as shown in the Figure
below:
41

--- Page 42 ---
Figure 9: Coordinated responses to drought under the Eswatini DRM Model based on clusters.
There are many actions that should be implemented in Eswatini during a drought, and the different
clusters will be responsible for different actions. The actions in responding to drought include:
a. In general:
• Rehabilitating irrigation networks to improve irrigation efficiency
• Massive information campaign – daily media briefings
• Water rationing
• Intensification of leak repair programs
• Water quality monitoring
• Cloud seeding operation
• Hydropower generation shall be kept to their respective minimum allowable generating capacities
b. For agriculture:
• Ensuring water availability in production areas through irrigation and cloud seeding. Climate risk
factors should be incorporated into any new or expanded water supply projects;
• Shifting of planting calendars or early planting, especially in drought vulnerable areas;
• Planting early maturing crops that require less water and are more tolerant to drought.
• Focus on location-specific varieties in drought vulnerable areas;
• Emergency income assistance to compensate for farm/fishery income loss;
• Emergency food assistance;
• Promotion of alternative crops as replacement for major staples.
• Providing seeds, planting materials and fingerlings;
• Fertilizer support (organic/inorganic); and further irrigation development.
The response actions are linked to various levels of drought intensity as indicated by the SPI and other
drought indicators, and they are summarized in table 6. During the early phases of the drought, a drought
risk, impact and needs assessment should be completed to identify the different regions, areas and
communities requiring aid. Water supply enhancing technologies and food aid should be distributed as
early as possible and use a practical approach to avoid human suffering.
42

--- Page 43 ---
CHAPTER 7: DROUGHT MITIGATION AND PREPAREDNESS
Being better prepared for the next drought requires actions to be put in place as soon as possible to
reduce drought risk and potential impacts of future droughts. Preliminary interactions with key
stakeholders has revealed the need to:
a) Include disaster risk reduction in national sectoral plans (mainstreaming drought).
b) Identify and engage stakeholders on disaster risk mitigation to minimize the impact of drought on
communities.
c) Establishment of a national risk observatory in Eswatini which would continuously collect and analyse
data from relevant agencies, coordinate and/or disseminate early warnings, and serve as a
communications hub. The National Risk Observatory will unify the disparate databases of various
agencies, improve dissemination and access of data and information to empower communities under
threat from drought.
d) There is need for a centralized database system that will capture and quantify all disaster incidences
into financial values so as to establish trends, and compare the impact of the hazards over the years.
There are many things that the Kingdom of Eswatini could do to mitigate risk and be better prepared,
including development of new and alternative water sources, community education and outreach to
encourage water conservation practices, and improved water resource monitoring and impact
assessment.
This National Drought Action Plan (appendix 1) presents a number of options to monitor and enhance
water supply, improve water quality and educate communities about the importance of water
conservation. The actions available are presented in summary tabular format (Appendix 1) for ease of
communication and reference.
Table 6: Summary of response actions under different levels of drought (per the SPI and PNRI drought
indicators), and by whom.
43

--- Page 44 ---
Other
Phase Indicators and Impacts Response actions Who leads Agencies
involved
Drought ● D0 (Abnormally dry) ● Regular monitoring
Advisory ● PNRI (< 75% for 3 months) ● Enact the drought task force to monitor situation
● SPI (-0.5 to -0.7)
EMS
● Short-term dryness slowing planting, growth of NDMA
crops or pastures
● Observed drops in reservoir, tank and
groundwater levels
● Close monitoring of conditions for persisting or rapidly
• D1 (Moderate drought)
worsening drought
● Activate risk assessment committee and assess risks and
impacts/needs to all potentially affected communities
• PNRI (<70% for 3 months) SPI (-0.8 to -1.2) across the major clusters impacted by drought (Food & EMS;
Non-food; Health; Education; Logistics and MoET;
Drought Telecommunications; Shelter) MTRD,
NDMA
watch/alert MoH;
• Some damage to crops, pastures ● Voluntary non-essential water-use restrictions applied ENPS,
Defence
● Intensive communication and public information
• Reservoirs, tanks and wells low, Some water campaign – implement communication with
shortages developing or imminent communities plan as per Table 5 and implement
communication mediums as per Table 5
Drought ● Mandatory and stringent water restrictions and water EMS; MoE;
● D2 (Severe drought) NDMA
warning conservation measures MTRD,MH
44

--- Page 45 ---
● Drought task force and drought monitoring committee UD; MoH;
● PNRI (< 65% for 6 months)
activated ENPS;
Defense
● SPI (-1.3 to -1.5) ● Potential drought emergency declared
MoA
● Crop or pasture losses likely, Reservoirs, tanks
● Distribution of RO units and hygiene kits to worst affected
and wells continue to decline, Water shortages
communities, especially schools
common;
● D3 (Extreme drought) ● Mandatory water allocations and emergency supplies
EMS; MoE
● PNRI (< 60% for 6 months) ● Maximum per capita daily water uses applied MTRD;
MNUD,
Drought
NDMA MoH;
emergency
● SPI (-1.6 to -1.9) ● Prie Mnister declares national State of Emergency ENPS,
Defense;
● Major crop/pasture losses ● Activate Emergency Operations Centre (OpCen) MoA
● Widespread water shortages or restrictions
● D5 (Exceptional drought) ● Distribution of emergency food and water supplies
EMS; MoE
● NRI (< 65% for 12 months) ● Hospital disaster emergency operations implemented
MTRD;
MNUD,
● SPI (-2.0 or less) NDMA MoH;
ENPS,
Defense;
● Exceptional and widespread crop/pasture losses
MoA
● Shortages of water in reservoirs, tanks and wells
threatening life
45

--- Page 46 ---
CHAPTER 8: THE ESWATINI NATIONAL DROUGHT ACTION PLAN
8.1 Guiding Principles
The National Drought Plan shall be used to deliver a robust drought risk reduction process in Eswatini,
guided by the following four principles.
1. Drought is a recurring phenomenon hence it is best managed by mainstreaming it into existing
national programmes, sectoral policies and plans, including the National Disaster Management Plans.
2. Eswatini should prepare better for drought, hence the impact of drought should be continuously
assessed and integrated into drought response plans.
3. Drought is best managed by including affected groups of Eswatini society, giving priority to most
vulnerable communities, the disable, women and youth and including them in drought decision-
making processes, policy design and planning.
4. The human, institutional, organizational and technical capacities of Eswatini citizens needs to be
enhanced for effective implementation of the drought action plan
8.2 Goals, Objectives and Activities of the National Drought Plan
The National Drought Plan for Eswatini has been developed based on the three pillars for drought risk
management. Below is an elaboration of its Goals, Purpose, Objectives and Activities to be undertaken.
Apart from a descriptive outlay in the foregoing sections, the plan has also been further elaborated in
matrix format (Appendix 1).
8.2.1 Vision
Improved mitigation of the adverse effects of drought in all areas of Eswatini resulting in increased
drought resilience of the country’s economic sectors, ecosystems and communities.
8.2.2 Goals and Objectives
The NDP as four components, which have been adapted from the DRAMP Framework and supported by
six goals and their corresponding objectives (see table below). Based on the drought cycle, the actions
towards each objective (elaborated in appendix 1) are not mutually exclusive, since some of those that
are aimed at managing and adapting to drought are also applicable to more than one pillar.
Table 7: Summary of Eswatini NDP pillars, goals and objectives.
46

--- Page 47 ---
Component / Key Pillar Goals Objectives
Component 1 (Key Pillar 1): Goal 1: Robust Objective 1: Strengthen Early Warning
Implementing Drought drought monitoring Systems
Monitoring, Early Warning and early warning Objective 2: Disseminate reliable warning
Systems and Impact messages so that response to the risks are
Assessment. measured and timely
Objective 3: Undertake drought impact
assessment
Component 2 (Key Pillar 2): Goal 2: Better Objective 1: Undertake drought impact
Assessment and assessment of drought assessment
Management of Drought risk and vulnerabilities
Risk and Vulnerability.
Component 3 (Key Pillar 3): Goal3: Effective Objective 1 : Respond to drought as it
Implementing Measures to response during unfolds
Limit Impacts of Drought and drought events
Better Respond to Drought. Goal 4: Enhanced Objective 1: Improve drought understanding
Drought Preparedness, Objective 2: Reduce drought risk and
Mitigation and vulnerability (Mitigation)
Resilience Objective 3: Support activities that increase
resilience to drought
Objective 4: Improve water supply and
demand management
Objective 5: Improve national food and
nutrition security
Objective 6: Improve agricultural resilience
to drought
Goal 5: Drought Risk Objective 1: Minimize losses due to drought
Transfer and sharing
Component 4 (Cross-Cutting Goal 6: Improve Objective 1: Improve drought
Issues) communication, communication and awareness
Addressing cross-cutting awareness, capacity Objective 2 Strengthen capacity to cope
issues that lead to building, with drought
transformative changes in mainstreaming drought Objective 3 Mainstream drought into
drought risk reduction and resource ministerial and sectoral plans
mobilization. Objective 4 Mainstream gender into drought
risk reduction
Objective 5: Mobilizing of adequate
resources for drought preparedness,
monitoring and response
47

--- Page 48 ---
CHAPTER 9: IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS
9.1 Mechanisms for Implementation
The NDMA will coordinate the implementation of actions outlined in the NDP, while the MoA will serve
as the Secretariat. The Ministry of Agriculture will use the NDP to report to the UNCCD on drought
management in Eswatini. The National Disaster Management Agency (NDMA) is the national institution
that is mandated to coordinate disaster risk reduction (DRR) in Eswatiini.
The implementation of this drought plan will be done through the clusters that are established under the
NDMA Act, which are used for coordinating and directing the implementation of disaster risk management
programs in the country. Within the clusters that are established under the NDMA, relevant ministries
and other members of the various clusters should implement interventions in their own sectors while the
NDMA will be managing the resources mobilized for drought risk mitigation, response, and recovery
actions.
The National Drought Plan is designed to be closely aligned with existing national programmes that are
driven by various government ministries, so that it is sustainable. The NDP is based on the premise that
there will be national collaboration to enhance consistent and coordinated national approaches around
the identified priorities, roles and responsibilities. It brings together the key government agencies,
communities, local urban government, NGO’s and private sector organizations to take a proactive
approach to drought management and develop appropriate response actions when drought occurs.
The agencies that are identified to play different roles in the NDP will seek to work with the National
Disaster Management Agency and the Ministry of Agriculture and build the capacities of responsible
entities and communities. This can be best achieved by following the guidelines of the RACI Approach,
which tasks the lead institutions with the responsibility to clearly identify the role of stakeholders in the
NDP based on their status (Responsible, Accountable, Consulted or Informed) and address them
accordingly. The NDMA Act (2006) provides a good solid framework since the actions of the NDP can be
coordinated through the nine clusters established under the Act, with priority actions directed to the
clusters that are more vulnerable to drought such as food and agriculture, water and sanitation, forestry
and environment etc.
Central to the NDP implementation, is the ability to generate and communicate quality weather
information. It is also crucial to ensure that different institutions that generate drought monitoring
information collaborate in their respective roles to give a more accurate analysis of drought circumstances
in the country. It is therefore recommended that a data sharing forum is established and capacitated to
support the NDP. Similarly, in a Technical Advisory Capacity, an ad hoc body of national experts is
proposed to support the NDP (see figure 10 below).
48

--- Page 49 ---
Figure 10: Implementation structure for the Eswatini NDP (2020 – 2030).
9.2 Monitoring and Reporting
Regular reporting on the status of implementation of the NDP is required in order to assess progress, gaps
and challenges as well as to capture lessons learned so that interventions deliver meaningful results. This
shall be done through annual reviews in accordance with the Government of Eswatini policies and
procedures focusing on the activities and timeframes.
The Ministry of Economic Planning and Development is best placed to monitor progress on the NDP and
report on its effectiveness together with cross-sectoral programmes that are anchored initiatives such as
the Poverty Reduction Strategy. In submitting their periodic reports, the Ministry of Agriculture and the
Office of the Deputy Prime Minister’s Office, will include progress on the on-going activities outlined in
the drought, as well as activities undertaken during emergency drought situations.
The NDP goals will be used as a basis for measuring progress on attainment of objectives and execution
of activities. An evaluation system should be established through a consultative process with all
stakeholders and sectors that have been involved in the planning and implementation of this drought
plan. It is ideal that civil society is involved in the monitoring exercise. Activities to be monitored are those
listed in Appendix 1. The NDMA should prepare and guide standardized data collection and analysis tools
and approaches and produce and share periodic progress reports with all stakeholders. These progress
reports should highlight successes and challenges in the implementation of the national drought plan and
assist in reviewing and updating plan.
49

--- Page 50 ---
9.3 Future Updates and Revisions
Regular updating and revising the drought plan will ensure the following: (i) increased agricultural
productivity and sustainability through sustainable agricultural practices; (ii) strengthened resilience of
water resource management and supply; (iii) improved food security, nutrition and delivery of health
services; and (iv) enhanced drought resilience and preparedness by strengthening the capacity of
institutions and drought affected communities to reduce their risks and vulnerability.
References
1. Adger, W. N. (2006). Vulnerability. Global Environmental Change 16:268-281.
2. Adger, W.N., Agrawala, S., Mirza, M.M.Q., Conde, C., O’Brien, K., Pulhin, J., Pulwarty, R., Smit, B. and
Takahashi, K. (2007). Assessment of adaptation practices, options, constraints and capacity. Climate
Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fourth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, pp. 717–743. In M.L. Parry,
O.F. Canziani, J.P. Palutikof, P.J. van der Linden and C.E. Hanson, Eds. Cambridge, UK, Cambridge
University Press.
3. American Planning Association (2019). Falling Dominoes: A Planner’s Guide to Drought and Cascading
Impacts.
4. Manyatsi, A. M., Mhazo, N., and Masarirambi, M. T. 2010. Climate Variability and Change as Perceived
by Rural Communities in Swaziland. Research Journal of Environmental and Earth Sciences, 2(3), 165-
170.
5. Mhlanga-Ndlovu, BFN & Nhamo, G. (2017) An assessment of Swaziland sugarcane farmer
associations’ vulnerability to climate change, Journal of Integrative Environmental Sciences, 14:1, 39-
57, https://doi.org/10.1080/1943815X.2017.1335329
6. Brown, R. (2010). Parliamentary Role and Relationship in Effectively Addressing Change Issues,
Swaziland. Climate Journal of Agricultural Studies. Vol. 2, No. 1, 86-98.
7. Carrão, H., G. Naumann, and P. Barbosa (2016). Mapping Global Patterns of Drought Risk: An
empirical framework based on sub-national estimates of hazard, exposure and vulnerability. Global
Environmental Change 39:108-124.
8. CDAC Network (2014). Practice Brief: Communicating with Communities during the First Six Weeks of
an Emergency Response.
9. Central Statistics Office. 2010a. Population Projection and Housing Census 2007-2030. Ministry of
Agriculture and Cooperatives, Mbabane.
10. Central Statistics Office. 2010b. Population Projection Report: 2007-2030. Central Statistics Office,
Eswatini.
50

--- Page 51 ---
11. Central Statistics Office. 2011. Poverty in a Decade of Slow Economic Growth: Swaziland in the 2000’s.
Central Statistics Office, Eswatini.
12. GoE (2016) National Climate Change Action Plan 2011-2028. Eswatini.
13. Crausbay, S. D., A. R. Ramirez, S. L. Carter, M. S. Cross, K. R. Hall, D. J. Bathke, J. L. Betancourt, S. Colt,
A. E. Cravens, M. S. Dalton, J. B. Dunham, L. E. Hay, M. J. Hayes, J. McEvoy, C. A. McNutt, M. A. Moritz,
K. H. Nislow, N. Raheem, and T. Sanford (2017). Defining Ecological Drought for the Twenty-First
Century. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 98:2543-2550.
14. Crossman, N. D. (2017). Drought Resilience, Adaptation and Management Policy (DRAMP) Framework
Technical Guidelines. UNCCD, Bonn.
15. Fourth National Climate Assessment (2018). Impacts, Risks, and Adaptation in the United States.
Chapter 28. “Reducing Risks through Actions.” Washington, D.C.: U.S. Global Change Research
Program. Available at https://nca2018.globalchange.gov/chapter/28 .
16. Füssel, H.-M., and R. J. T. Klein (2006). Climate Change Vulnerability Assessments: An Evolution of
Conceptual Thinking. Climatic Change 75:301-329.
17. Gamedze, M. (2006). Climate Change Vulnerability and Adaptation Assessments in Swaziland. Online
publication Research Abstract available at
http://unfccc.int/files/adaptation/adverse_effects_and_response_measures_art_48/application/pdf
/200609_swaziland_iva_abstract.pdf Accessed 5 May 2020.
18. Gbetibouo, G. A., C. Ringler, and R. Hassan (2010). Vulnerability of the South African farming sector to
climate change and variability: An indicator approach. Natural Resources Forum 34:175-187.
19. GoE (1997). Swaziland Environmental Action Plan. Ministry of Tourism, Environment and
Communications, Mbabane.
20. GoE (2014). National Disaster Risk Management Communication Strategy (2014 –2018).
21. GoE (2016). Third National Communication to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change.
22. GoE (2015). National Progress Report on the Implementation of the Hyogo Framework for Action
(2013-2015). http://www.preventionweb.net/english/hyogo/progress/reports/
23. GoE (2013). Annual Vulnerability Assessment and Analysis Report. Mbabane, Government of
Eswatini.
24. GoE (2014). Optimizing Groundwater Use within the Context of Integrated Water Resources
Management (IWRM) Framework and General Water Sector Reforms.
25. GoE (2014). Vulnerability and Adaptation Assessment: Biodiversity and Ecosystems. Eswatini National
Trust Commission, Ministry of Tourism and Environment Affairs, Mbabane.
51

--- Page 52 ---
26. GoE, (2015). The Aligned Eswatini National Action Plan to Combat Desertification, Land Degradation
and Drought FY 2015‐2025. Ministry of Agriculture, Mbabane.
27. IFAD (2015). Rural Poverty in the Kingdom of Swaziland.
www.ruralpovertyportal.org/country/home/tags/swaziland . Accessed 27 March 2020.05.18
28. IPCC. (2014). Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and
Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. pp. 1132. In Field, C.B., V.R. Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J.
Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S.
Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White, Eds. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA.
29. Manyatsi, A.M. and Mhazo, N. (2014) A Comprehensive Scoping and Assessment Study of Climate
Smart Agriculture (CSA) Policies in Swaziland (Draft). Commissioned by the Food, Agriculture and
Natural Resources Policy Analysis Network (FANRPAN).
30. Manyatsi, A.M. and Brown, R. (2009). Integrated Water Resources Management Survey and Status
Report: Swaziland, Global Water Partnership, Southern Africa.
31. Oseni, T. O. and Masarirambi, M. T. (2011). The Effects of Climate Change on Maize Production and
Food Security in Swaziland. American Journal of Agriculture and Environmental Science, 11(3), 385-
393.
32. Remmelzwaal, A and Vilakati J.D. (1994). Physiographic map of Swaziland. Ministry of Agriculture and
Cooperatives, Mbabane.
33. Remmelzwaal R. (2006). Swaziland: Country Environment Profile. Report Prepared for the Joint-
Venture of NIRAS PINSISI Consortium partners. AGROTEC S.p.A, June 2006.
34. Sellers, P. J. (1985). Canopy reflectance, photosynthesis and transpiration. International Journal of
Remote Sensing 6:1335-1372.
35. Svoboda, M., D. LeComte, M. Hayes, R. Heim, K. Gleason, J. Angel, B. Rippey, R. Tinker, M. Palecki,
D. Stooksbury, D. Miskus, and S. Stephens. 2002. The Drought Monitor. Bulletin of the American
Meteorological Society 83:1181-1190.
36. Sweet and Khumalo, 1994 Sweet, R.J. and Khumalo S. 1994. Range Resources and Grazing Potentials
in Swaziland. FAO Report, Ministry of Agriculture and Co-operatives, Mbabane.
37. Tsegai, D., J. Liebe, and R. Ardakanian (2015). Capacity Development to Support National Drought
Management Policies: Synthesis. UNW-DPC, Bonn, Germany.
38. UNISDR. (2015). Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015 - 2030.
39. Van Loon, A. F., T. Gleeson, J. Clark, A. I. J. M. Van Dijk, K. Stahl, J. Hannaford, G. Di Baldassarre, A. J.
Teulng, L. M. Tallaksen, R. Uijlenhoet, D. M. Hannah, J. Sheffield, M. Svoboda, B. Verbeiren, T.
Wagener, S. Rangecroft, N. Wanders, and H. A. J. Van Lanen. 2016. Drought in the Anthropocene.
52

--- Page 53 ---
Nature Geosci 9:89-91. Vicente-Serrano, S. M., S. Beguería, J. Lorenzo-Lacruz, J. J. Camarero, J. I.
López-Moreno, C. Azorin- Molina, J. Revuelto, E. Morán-Tejeda, and A. Sanchez-Lorenzo (2012).
Performance of Drought Indices for Ecological, Agricultural, and Hydrological Applications. Earth
Interactions 16:1-27.
40. Vicente-Serrano, S. M., S. Beguería, J. Lorenzo-Lacruz, J. J. Camarero, J. I. López-Moreno, C. Azorin-
Molina, J. Revuelto, E. Morán-Tejeda, and A. Sanchez-Lorenzo (2012). Performance of Drought Indices
for Ecological, Agricultural, and Hydrological Applications. Earth Interactions 16:1-27.
41. Wilhite, D. A. (2000). Drought as a Natural Hazard: Concepts and Definitions. Pages 3-18 in D. A.
Wilhite, editor. Drought: A Global Assessment, Vol. I. Routledge, London.
42. Wilhite, D. A., and M. H. Glantz (1985). Understanding: the Drought Phenomenon: The Role of
Definitions. Water International 10:111-120. World Meteorological Organization. 2012. Standardized
Precipitation Index User Guide. World Meteorological Organization, Geneva, Switzerland.
53

--- Page 54 ---
Appendix 1: Eswatini National Drought Action Plan
Goal / Objective Actions Who? Assisted by? By
When?
GOAL 1: ROBUST DROUGHT MONITORING AND EARLY WARNING
Objective 1: 1. Continue developing the Eswatini Drought Monitor in order to produce reliable NDMA EMS , NEWU , DWA On-going
Develop early seasonal forecasts and develop appropriate decision-support tools for impacted
warning systems areas
2. Monitor key indicators and indices of precipitation, temperature, soil moisture, DWA EMS On-going
vegetation condition, stream flow, snowpack and ground water NDMA
3. Incorporate indigenous knowledge into scientific drought monitoring and NDMA Communities IOHL On-going
forecasting NEWU, DWA
Objective 2: 1. Support national weather forecasting institution to deliver continuous data sets EMS NEWU, DWA On-going
Disseminate on drought
reliable warning
2. Harmonize datasets held by different agencies CSU NEWU DWA 2022
messages so that
3. Establish clear data sharing protocols between key data institutions CSU NEWU DWA 2021
response to the
risks is measured 4. Use the Central Statistics Office as a national data repository of drought data CSU NEWU DWA 2020
and timely
5. Apply communications protocol to pass information to affected areas and sectors NDMA EMS, NEWU, DWA 2021
of society
Objective 3: 6. Monitor and assess the impact / consequences of drought, especially the impacts NDMA MOA SECTORS After
Undertake to vulnerable sectors such as agriculture drought
drought impact events
assessment
GOAL 2: BETTER ASSESSMENT OF DROUGHT RISK AND VULNERABILITIES
Objective 1: 1. Monitor and assess the impact / consequences of drought, especially the impacts NDMA MOA SECTORS After
Undertake to vulnerable sectors such as heath and agriculture drought
54

--- Page 55 ---
drought impact events
assessment 2. Report on drought impacts NDMA MOA SECTORS After
drought
events
GOAL 3 : EFFECTIVE RESPONSE DURING DROUGHT EVENTS
Objective 1: NDMA SECTORS During a
1. Implement drought response actions as drought unfolds( Table 6)
Respond to drought
drought as it
2. Adopt to the drought communication protocols as outlined in the NDP NDMA MOA, MTEA, CSU During a
unfolds
drought
NDMA SECTORS During a
3. Implement communication protocols with communities (Table 5)
drought
EMS NDMA, MICT On-going
4. Use social media to receive real-time updates on community-level drought
SECTORS
impacts
GOAL 4: ENHANCED DROUGHT PREPAREDNESS, MITIGATION AND RESILIENCE
Objective 1: NDMA Civil Society Continuo
1. Implement and improve systematic damage assessments
Improve drought usly
understanding NDMA MOA, IOHL EWSC Continuo
2. Strengthen drought research
Civil Society usly
Objective 2: 1. Assess the physical, social, economic and environmental pressures on NDMA DWA Continuo
Reduce drought communities to identify who and what is at risk and why, before, during and usly
risk and shortly after drought
vulnerability
2. Undertake drought risk mapping by identifying drought impacts on vulnerable NDMA DWA 2022
(Mitigation)
economic sectors, including food and agriculture (cropping and livestock), EMS
biodiversity and ecosystem, energy, tourism and health EWSC
3. Assess conditions or situations that increase the resistance or susceptibility to NDMA MTEA EWSC On-going
drought and the coping capacity of communities affected by drought MOA SECTORS
55

--- Page 56 ---
4. Assess the extent of potential damage or loss in the event of a drought NDMA MTEA, MOA On-going
SECTORS
5. Support individuals and communities in long term efforts aimed at the reduction NDMA MTEA MOA On-going
of vulnerability to drought, the management of drought, and recovery from SECTORS
drought.
6. Strengthen the capacity of institutions and drought affected communities to NDMA MNRE EWSC 2022
reduce their risks and vulnerability (LT). SECTORS, MTEA MOA
MEPD GOVT LINE 2025
7. Develop and implement drought sector-wide response plans
MINISTRIES
NDMA MOA After
8. Coordinate drought responses and procedures Civil Society drought
events
9. Assist farmers in restoring agricultural systems after drought NDMA NPGRC Civil Society After
Donors drought
events
10. Mainstream drought into national development initiatives aimed at promoting MEPD GOVT LINE 2025
sustainable rural livelihoods MINISTRIES
11. Support national efforts to achieve country's Sustainable Development Goals, MEPD MOF, GOVT LINE 2025
particularly SDG 14 in achieving a land degradation neutral status by 2030. MINISTRIES
MOA Farmers 2030
12. Support national sustainable rangeland management practices
Objective 3: 1. Assist communities and local governments to draw up their own drought NDMA MTAD MHUB 2025
Support activities contingency plans (Resilience) SECTORS
that increase NDMA SECTORS On-going
resilience to
2. Mitigate future drought impacts by implementing response actions under
drought
different levels of drought (per the SPI and PNRI drought indicators in Table 6)
3. Diversify income for both subsistence and commercial farmers, so as to reduce MOA MEPD MOF 2030
dependence on rain-fed agriculture
56

--- Page 57 ---
4. Support new activities like agroforestry, bee farming, conservation agriculture MOA ESWADE Civil Society 2022
and small secondary industries. Donors
Objective 4: 1. FastTrack implementation of integrated water resources management (IWRM) DWA MNRE MHUD 2022
Improve water and cost recovery targets
supply and
2. Apply policies to ensure that the price of water and community management DWA MNRE EWSC 2022
demand
responsibility limits its consumption to sustainable levels MHUD
management
3. Apply water conservation measures and water awareness campaigns to increase DWA MNRE EWSC 2022
the consumption efficiency and hence limit demand from primary sources MHUD
4. Promote water-saving technologies in irrigated sugarcane and other production DWA MNRE EWSC MHUD 2022
systems
5. Introduce measures / incentives to promote efficient use of water DWA MNRE EWSC 2022
MHUD
6. Scale up water harvesting activities from previous programmes such as LUSLIM / MNRE Civil Society Donors 2023
larger domestic rainwater tanks in remote areas
7. Scale up the supply of small rainwater harvesting structures, water impounding MNRE MOA 2025
structures, earth dams and farm reservoirs Civil Society Donors
8. Scale up climate smart agriculture and conservation agricultural activities MOA Civil Society Donors 2025
9. Rehabilitate existing small-scale irrigation systems for agricultural productivity MOA Civil Society Donors 2025
and natural resources sustainability
10. Construct more boreholes in the Lowveld and Lubombo MNRE Civil Society Donors 2025
11. Community-based watershed management for sustainable water resources and MNRE MOA 2025
livelihood development in critical watersheds of selected irrigation systems Civil Society Donors
Objective 5: MOA MOH 2030
1. Increase the resources available to poor households, in order to improve their
Improve food and Civil Society Donors
access to food during drought periods
nutrition security H, F& A Sectors
57

--- Page 58 ---
MOH MOA 2030
2. Assist families to enable them to make the best use of available resources Civil Society Donors
H, F& A Sectors
MOA MOH MHUD 2030
3. Promote improved food storage and preservation methods, starting at the
Civil Society Donors
household level
H, F& A Sectors
MOA MOH MHUD 2030
4. Promote good nutritional practices, particularly for children and pregnant and
Civil Society Donors
lactating women, and improved health and sanitation practices.
H, F& A Sectors
NMC NAMBOARD 2021
5. Maintain efficient arrangements with food importers
MOA NDMA, Donors On-going
6. Intervene during periods of food shortages
Private Sector
7. Distribute and encourage use of drought tolerant crops and high value crops NPGRC MOA EXT. 2022
Objective 6: 1. Upscale programmes that support livestock breeds being made available to MOA MOA Dept. Vet 2022
Improve farmers
agricultural
2. Adopt climate smart technologies and practices MOA Private Sector, DWA 2022
resilience to
3. Increase the range of drought mitigating technologies and practices. DARSS Private Sector 2022
drought
4. Increase number of farms that produce and store hay MOA MOA EXT. 2025
Dept. Vet
5. Distribute and encourage use of drought tolerant crops NPGRC MOA EXT. 2022
6. Support shift to alternative cropping systems and calendars MOA DARSS 2022
EXT.
7. Increase the contribution of agricultural research and extension services to DARSS MOA EXT. 2022
drought risk reduction
GOAL 5: DROUGHT RISK TRANSFER AND SHARING
58

--- Page 59 ---
Objective 1: 1. Establish drought risk insurance or fund MOF MEPD Farmers 2030
Minimize losses Insurance Companies
due to drought Private Sector
2. Investigate new and novel drought risk financing options MOF MEPD Insurance 2030
Companies Farmers
Private Sector
GOAL 6: IMPROVE COMMUNICATION, AWARENESS, CAPACITY BUILDING, DROUGHT MAINSTREAMING AND RESOURCE MOBILIZATION
Objective 1 1. Spearhead campaigns on drought related disease spread and prevention MOH NDMA 2022
Improve measures
communication 2. Promotion of school gardening, urban gardens and backyard gardens to improve MoET MOHUB MOH 2023
and awareness diet diversification and dissemination Civil Society
3. Disseminate knowledge of compost-making techniques and resilience techniques MOA Civil Society 2023
against drought (including water conservation techniques - drip irrigation - and
traditional storage techniques)
MoET Civil Society 2022
4. Increase water supply and create backup options for schools
MNRE
5. Adopt technologies for rapid communication
MoET MICT 2022
MoET Civil Society 2022
6. Target women, schools for education campaigns and awareness raising
7. Raise awareness on drought at different level using various mechanisms MOH MNRE MHUD On-going
NDMA LINE MINISTRIES, On-going
8. Capacity building among professionals for communication, data collection and
SECTORS
early warning systems
9. Set-up national platform on DRR and emergency preparedness NDMA MOA, MTEA , CSU 2021
59

--- Page 60 ---
Objective 2 1. Capacitate the subsidiary bodies established under the NDMA Act, including the NDMA GOVT LINE On-going
Strengthen National Disaster Management Council and the Regional Disaster Coordination MINISTRIES SECTORS
capacity to cope Committees on drought issues so that the National Drought Plan is fully
with drought implemented within the existing structures
2. Establish an ad hoc body made up of a Technical Experts including the sectors of NDMA MNRE , MOA 2021
government and non-government organizations needs in order to contribute MTEA, MHUD MTARD
and harmonize data for drought monitoring.
3. Build drought databases and capacity in key data institutions NDMA MOA MTEA 2025
CSU, Donors
4. Assess people's capacity to live with less water during a drought period and their NDMA MHUD , MOA MTEA, 2022
willingness and capability to adapt MNRE
MTARD
5. Strengthen the existing drought institutional framework NDMA MOA 2025
6. Train and involve local communities in drought decision-making processes, NDMA ESWADE Civil 2022
policy design and planning MOA Society
7. Increase water supply to schools and provide education and activities on water MNRE MoET 2025
saving, urban gardens, composting. MOF
Objective 3 1. Create an enabling policy and service environment to mainstream drought into MEPD GOVT LINE 2022
Mainstream project development plans MINISTRIES
drought into
2. Prioritize drought into sectoral plans MEPD LINE MINISTRIES 2022
ministerial and
Civil Society
sectoral plans
Objective 4 3. Integrate women’s economic empowerment in NDP implementation activities in MEPD LINE MINISTRIES 2025
Mainstream order to eradicate their extreme poverty. CIVIL SOCIETY
gender into
4. Identify and break down gender-related barriers to speed up implementation of MEPD GOVT LINE 2026
drought risk
the Aligned UNCCD NAP to create quality income earning opportunities for rural MINISTRIES Civil
reduction
women involved in implementation activities Society
60

--- Page 61 ---
5. Develop strategic partnerships with women organizations to support DPMO NDMA SECTORS Civil 2025
implementation of the NDP Society
6. Support land and water based gender-related initiatives and to promote gender MEPF NDMA MOA MNRE, 2025
equality and/or resource poor women’s empowerment at community level SECTORS
Civil Society
Objective 5: 7. Capitalization of the National Disaster Management Fund (DMF) NDMA MOA Government 2021
Mobilizing of and cooperating
adequate partners
resources for
8. Optimize available national, regional and international funding for drought MEPD NDMA, Government 2021
drought
preparedness, monitoring and response cooperating partners
preparedness,
9. Incorporate drought preparedness in all relevant capital projects MEPD MOF, MOA , NDMA 2021
monitoring and
Government and
response
cooperating partners
61