--- Page 1 ---
LESOTHO NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMME IN NATURAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT,
COMBATING DESERTIFICATION AND
MITIGATING THE EFFECTS OF DROUGHT
UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION TO COMBAT DESERTIFICATION IN THOSE COUNTRIES
EXPERIENCING SERIOUS DROUGHT AND/OR DESERTIFICATION,
PARTICULARLY IN AFRICA
Prepared by: Emmanuel Motebang Pomela, PhD
NES, Maseru, January 1999
i

--- Page 2 ---
CCD Lesotho National Action Programme
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Acronyms and Abbreviations.............................................................................................................................3
CHAPTER 1: Elaborating a National Action Programme in Lesotho......................................4
1.1. An Overview of Desertification in Lesotho.................................................................................................4
1.2. The Lesotho National Action Plan to Implement Agenda 21......................................................................5
1.3. The International Convention to Combat Desertification............................................................................6
1.4. The Role of the NES in the NAP.................................................................................................................7
1.5. The NES Perspective...................................................................................................................................8
1.6. Consultations for the Elaboration of the NAP.............................................................................................9
CHAPTER 2: Programme Objective, Approach and Rationale for the NAP..........................11
2.1. Programme Objective................................................................................................................................11
2.2. Programme Approach................................................................................................................................11
2.3. Programme Rationale................................................................................................................................11
CHAPTER 3: Programme Areas of the NAP..........................................................................12
CHAPTER 4: Operationalizing the NAP in Lesotho..............................................................27
4.1. Need for Partnership.................................................................................................................................27
4.2. Coordinating Role of the NES...................................................................................................................28
4.3. Relevant On-going Programmes, Projects and Activities.........................................................................28
4.4. Selection of Lead Institutions for the NAP................................................................................................30
4.5. Establishment of a National Desertification Steering Committee..............................................................32
4.6. Monitoring and Evaluation........................................................................................................................34
CHAPTER 5: Priority Areas for Action..................................................................................36
5.1. Selection of Priorities for Action...............................................................................................................36
5.2. Selection of Geographic Priorities.............................................................................................................37
ANNEXE..........................................................................................................................................................39
National Environment Secretariat

--- Page 3 ---
CCD Lesotho National Action Programme
Acronyms and Abbreviations
ASIP Agriculture Sector Investment Programme
CCD Convention to Combat Desertification
DCFL Department of Conservation, Forestry and Land Use Planning
DDC District Development Council
DDSC District Desertification Steering Committee
DNRMC District Natural Resources Management Committee
EIA Environmental Impact Assessment
GIS Geographic Information Systems
GNP Gross National Product
NAP National Action Programme
NDSC National Desertification Steering Committee
NES National Environment Secretariat
NEYC National Environment Youth Corps
NGOs Non-Governmental Organizations
PTC Production Through Conservation
RMA Range Management Area
RMD Range Management Division
SADDMA Sustainable Agricultural Development Programme of Mountainous
Areas
VDC Village Development Council
VSECC Vegetative Soil Erosion Control Concept
National Environment Secretariat

--- Page 4 ---
CCD Lesotho National Action Programme
CHAPTER 1: Elaborating a National Action Programme in Lesotho
1.1. An Overview of Desertification in Lesotho
Lesotho is a fragile ecosystem because of its topography, rainfall patterns, erodibility
of its soils, land use patterns and special habitats such as bogs and sponges. The
topography is mountainous with sharp terrains ranging in elevation from 1460 metres
above sea level in the west to 3400 metres above sea level in the Northeast. The rainfall
pattern in Lesotho is very erratic and unpredictable. The rainy season starts in early
spring, mostly with heavy downpours and hail storms that cause a lot of soil movement
and it lasts till late autumn. The winters are mostly dry but with occasional snow in the
high elevations and light rain in the lowlands. The dry winters with no vegetation
growth favour conditions for erosive early spring rains. Lesotho soils are derived from
the underlying sandstone and basalt parent materials in the lowlands and mountains,
respectively. The sandstone derived soils are highly erodible. The land use patterns in
Lesotho are communal in the rangelands and semi-private in cultivated lands. Lesotho
has world renowned special high altitude wetland habitats with rare plant and animal
species. These wetlands are a main source of the southern African region’s waters. All
these factors make Lesotho a very fragile ecosystem whose use must be guarded.
In Lesotho, desertification is understood as a bio-physical land degradation
phenomenon which manifests itself as loss of biological productivity resulting from
over-exploitation and mismanagement of the natural resource base, be it water, soil,
land, plants or animals, and land degradation resulting from excessive soil loss,
depletion of pastures, loss of soil fertility, loss of water holding capacity of soils, loss
of storage capacity of ponds, reservoirs, rivers, pools and inundation of bottom lands
with sediments (see Chakela and Seitlheko, 19951).
Land degradation in the form of soil erosion is pervasive in Lesotho. Rain water
induced gully, rill and sheet erosion are the primary agents of soil loss in Lesotho. Soil
loss is seen as sheet and rill erosion in many cultivated fields and as gullies that
transverse the rangelands and cultivated fields all over the country.
The primary cause of soil erosion is mismanagement of the land, leaving it unprotected
and critically vulnerable to agents of destruction. Over-cultivation and overgrazing by
domestic animals is common in Lesotho. Consequently, the land is in most instances
left without the necessary adequate ground cover. In 1977, about 15,000 ha of land area
were classified as gullies and most of the gullies (about 90%) being active (Flannery,
1977). Although gullies take land out of use permanently and are easily observed, sheet
1
Chakela, Q. K. and M. E. Seitlheko. 1995. Desertification in Lesotho. A review of policies,
strategies and programmes to address land degradation. Paper prepared for the Lesotho National
Environment Secretariat.
National Environment Secretariat

--- Page 5 ---
CCD Lesotho National Action Programme
and rill erosion have the greatest impact on productivity of the land and contribute
immensely to the desertification process. Many fields and pastures have been taken out
of production due to excessive sheet and rill erosion taking with it the top soil which is
necessary for the production of crops, fodder and grass. Over the last 20 years, Lesotho
has lost over 100 thousand hectares of arable land; a 25% decrease in utilizable land for
production of food and fodder.
Loss of biological productivity, deterioration of rangelands and poor crop and animal
productivity are other signs of land degradation and advancement of desertification in
Lesotho. Productivity of major and animals has significantly declined in recent years
due to poor land and rangeland conditions. In the early seventies, productivity of both
crops and animals was relatively high. In the 1970s, a Lesotho sheep produced on
average 5 kg of wool per year, maize and wheat yields were about 2 tons/ha and 1
ton/ha, respectively. In recent years, however, yields have declined significantly to
where they are now 2.5 kg of wool per sheep per year, 860 kg/ha of maize and 650
kg/ha of wheat.
Furthermore, rangelands have seriously deteriorated. Rangeland carrying capacity have
declined to levels where rearing animals in large enough numbers in Lesotho is
becoming very difficult. The decline in the quality of rangelands has also affected the
special and fragile ecosystems in the alpine reaches of the country. Many bogs and
sponges, for which Lesotho is world renowned, are threatened by over-utilisation and
trampling by livestock. Many other habitats supporting a variety of endemic species are
being destroyed. Overall the country is becoming a dilapidated landscape with gullies
and bare rock. Compounding the problem even further is the recurrent drought that
often threatens the very existence of Basotho.
Although population density sometimes is mentioned as the underlying factor for
resource degradation, leading to over-cultivation and overgrazing, such statement
needs scrutinity. In Lesotho, almost all farming systems are of an extensive type. This
holds for the cropping component dominated by maize cultivation on semi-privatized
fields, and for the livestock component of extensive grazing in open access areas. In
rural villages, houses with a home garden and/or fruit trees are a clear minority. Home
compounds nor farming fields use to have fences that protect them against grazing
animals. Trees are seldom seen in conjunction with agricultural fields. In the Lesotho
context, over-cultivation and overgrazing should hence be understood as resource-
mining which has reached and even surpassed its ecological limits.
In spite of enormous efforts for several decades of the Government of Lesotho with
international support, there has not yet been a significant change for the better in the
land use by the rural populations. Apparently the root causes of the land degradation
problems have not yet been addressed.
1.2. The Lesotho National Action Plan to Implement Agenda 21
National Environment Secretariat

--- Page 6 ---
CCD Lesotho National Action Programme
Because of the seriousness of desertification and drought, the nations of the world
agreed on the text of the Convention at the Rio Earth Summit in 1992, and proposed
that combating desertification and mitigating the effects of drought be part of Agenda
21. Lesotho has prepared its National Action Plan to Implement Agenda 21 and within
it are strategies to combat desertification and mitigate the effects of drought (Agenda
21, Lesotho, 1994).
Lesotho’s strategies to implement Agenda 21 are:
‚ Prepare a comprehensive National Plan for combating desertification
and mitigating the effects of drought;
‚ Develop anti-desertification measures to be integrated within the plan;
‚ Develop early warning systems to enhance preparedness; and
‚ Promote public awareness of desertification control and management of
effects of drought
These strategies are in line with the requirements of the Convention to Combat
Desertification.
1.3. The International Convention to Combat Desertification
The United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification and Mitigate the Effects of
Drought (CCD) for which Lesotho is a Party was ratified by Lesotho in September
1995.
The three objectives of the CCD (Article 1 (b)) are:
i. to prevent and/or reduce land degradation;
ii. rehabilitate partly degraded lands; and
iii. reclaim the desertified lands.
The CCD describes desertification as land degradation in arid, semi-arid and dry sub-
humid areas resulting from various factors, including climatic variations and human
activities (Article 1 (a)). In Article 1(b) of the Convention, Combating Desertification
is meant to include activities which are part of integrated development in desertified
areas for sustainable development and are aimed at preventing and/or reducing land
degradation, rehabilitating partly degraded lands and reclaiming desertified lands.
The Convention also embraces the efforts that are meant to reduce the negative impacts
of drought. The Convention thus describes drought as a naturally occurring
phenomenon existing when precipitation is significantly low and causes the
hydrological imbalances which ultimately affect the land resource productive systems
(Article 1 (c)). Mitigating the effects of drought means activities related to the
National Environment Secretariat

--- Page 7 ---
CCD Lesotho National Action Programme
prediction of drought and intended to reduce the vulnerability of society and natural
systems to drought as it relates to combating desertification (Article 1 (d)).
The Convention requires that Parties draw their national action programmes to combat
desertification and mitigate the effects of drought (Article 10).
The purpose of the process of preparing and implementing national action plans is to
harmonize the country’s efforts in fighting environmental degradation (particularly
natural resources deterioration) and to further strengthen the efforts of the CCD and
realign them with those of the national environmental programme - particularly the
national strategies to combat desertification. A national action programme reflects the
results of an iterative process; new knowledge and experiences from implementation
will feedback to planning and to updating the programme.
Since desertification and drought affect the rural communities more severely, prior
attention is given to these groups throughout the country. In combating desertification
and mitigating the effects of drought, participation of local communities, rural
organizations, National Government, Non-Governmental Organizations and
international and regional organizations is essential. Partnerships will be built to
enhance effective implementation of programmes and activities.
1.4. The Role of the NES in the NAP
The CCD calls for Parties to work closely together in the elaboration and
implementation of national action programmes (Article 14). The National Action
Programmes are the key operational tools for transforming the provisions of the
Convention into concrete actions to combat desertification and mitigate the effects of
drought at the national level. This then calls for a central body from which co-
ordination can be brought about.
The National Action Programme to Combating Desertification and Mitigate the Efects
of Drought in Lesotho will further be referred to in this document as the NAP.
The responsibility for co-ordination of the preparation and implementation of the NAP
in Lesotho is delegated to the National Environment Secretariat (NES), which becomes
the focal point for the programme. The NES was established in 1994 under the Office
of the Prime Minister to oversee and co-ordinate the National Action Programme to
Implement Agenda 21 in Lesotho.
In general, the NES is the lead agency in environmental management in Lesotho and is
mandated to promote socio-economically and environmentally sustainable
development, by:
co-ordinating, advising, and regulating environmental management in Lesotho;
National Environment Secretariat

--- Page 8 ---
CCD Lesotho National Action Programme
‚ setting standards and guidelines and monitoring compliance to environmental
impact assessments;
‚ disseminating information on environmental issues;
‚ empowering and creating awareness among local communities and other
stakeholders on conservation of the country’s environment to achieve
sustainable development; and
‚ ensuring Lesotho’s adherence to international environmental treaties and
conventions to which the country is a Party.
The CCD is embraced in Agenda 21 and by virtue becomes part of the activities of the
NES.
Therefore, the NES must be posed to implement the NAP and become the Government
agency responsible for co-ordinating activities related to the preparation of the NAP
document, implementation of programmes, monitoring and assessing the impacts of
programmes and international coordination in order to maximize the efficient use of
resources, to ensure responsive assistance, and to facilitate the implementation of
national action programmes and priorities under the Convention.
1.5. The NES Perspective
The aim of the National Environment Secretariat is to manage the physical
environment through the human environment. The NES realizes that natural forces do
not destroy the balance of environmental components as much as the human forces do.
Therefore, it is imperative that efforts to reverse environmental degradation be
addressed towards managing the human environment.
The NES perceives that the National Action Programme to Combat Desertification and
Mitigate the effects of drought should embrace the following concerns:
- Public awareness on desertification and drought issues must be promoted
and communities at all levels be empowered to participate in all stages of the
NAP;
- Communities must be taught to better manage their land resources in a
sustainable manner;
- Land degradation and drought monitoring and assessment should support the
co-ordination of the NAP and should initiate development of a national
environmental information system with a view to providing action-oriented
information to users;
- Early warning systems must be developed and put in place to enhance
drought preparedness;
National Environment Secretariat

--- Page 9 ---
CCD Lesotho National Action Programme
- Research, development and transfer, acquisition and adaptation of
technology should increase knowledge of desertification and drought
processes and also help develop appropriate technologies for combating
desertification and mitigating the effects of drought.
1.6. Consultations for the Elaboration of the NAP
The process of formulating the NAP for Lesotho began in May 1995 with consultations
at the national and district levels. At the national level, the process was guided by the
production of a paper by Chakela and Seitlheko (1995) detailing the level of
desertification in Lesotho and the past efforts to combat it. A plenary workshop was
held to further elaborate the NAP process and to indicate the way forward towards
country-wide consultations. A consultative mechanism was then devised to guide the
district and village level consultations.
At the district and village level, discussions were held on land degradation problems,
its causes and remedies, and the programmes that could be engaged to combat it and to
better manage the land resource base. At the same time public awareness on
desertification issues was undertaken. The district and village meetings began in May
1997. From May to August, 1997, ten district workshops (one in each District) and 37
village level meetings were held.
Lessons learned from the district workshops and the village level meetings were many
and varied but the following are noteworthy;
1. Villagers are aware of land degradation in their respective areas but are unable to
take action due to lack of leadership from traditional as well as cosmopolitan
leaders
2. There are few government-community initiatives to enable active participation
3. Communities are aware of the laws governing land use and protection of woodlots,
grazing areas and bad agricultural practices, e.g. ploughing along the slope
4. Communities are also aware that law enforcement is lacking in recent days
5. Communities are aware that poverty in their areas is real and widespread and also
that it inhibits people to participate fully in land degradation control programmes,
especially where financial resources are required
6. Communities also realize that individual initiatives in controlling land degradation
are more successful than community or government organized initiatives.
National Environment Secretariat

--- Page 10 ---
CCD Lesotho National Action Programme
The lessons learned from national, district and community level workshops and
meetings were used by the NES to draft a NAP Concept Paper which subsequently has
been reviewed and amended during the National Forum on the CCD held in Maseru
from 17 to 19 March, 1998.
The present document is taking into account the results of the Forum as well as the
recommendations from the October’98 meeting of the National Desertification
Steering Committee.
National Environment Secretariat

--- Page 11 ---
CCD Lesotho National Action Programme
CHAPTER 2: Programme Objective, Approach and Rationale for the NAP
2.1. Programme Objective
The objective of the NAP is to structure and guide the process and define the elements
of strengthening environmental capacities, enhance public awareness and mobilize
active participation in order to better manage the natural resources, combat land
degradation and desertification and mitigate the effects of drought. The objective also
contains elements of strengthening the policy, legal and institutional foundations for
environmental management.
2.2. Programme Approach
The programme will, working in line with the strategy of the NES and CCD to combat
desertification, work to harmonize all programme activities and raise public awareness
on issues of land degradation and desertification. The programme approach will
endeavour to ensure collaboration and co-ordination among Government institutions,
NGOs, the donor community and the public in order to minimize duplication and
fragmentation of efforts and maximize impact. Of considerable importance is the need
for accountability and transparency of institutions, organizations and agencies that are
involved with the implementation of the NAP. Due to sharing of experiences and
information, such programme approach shall have a synergistic effect, save resources,
improve efficiency and enhance the quality and process of programme implementation.
The first approach to NAP implementation is to develop a set of indicators of progress
or lack thereof in combating desertification and mitigating the effects of drought. A
number of indicators have been included in Annex 1 and are to be developed further to
enable monitoring and assessment of programme impacts.
2.3. Programme Rationale
The objective of the CCD is to combat desertification and mitigate the effects of
drought through effective action at all levels, supported by international coordination
and partnership arrangements, in the framework of an integrated approach which is
consistent with Agenda 21, with a view to contributing to the achievement of
sustainable development (Article 2).
The Lesotho NAP components are in support of this objective and seek to reduce
poverty within the nation’s framework of economic growth and the protection of
environment and natural resources. The NAP seeks to support Government efforts in
capacity building to better manage the natural resources, combat land degradation and
desertification and mitigate the effects of drought.
National Environment Secretariat

--- Page 12 ---
CCD Lesotho National Action Programme
CHAPTER 3: Programme Areas of the NAP
In order to structure the overall programme of the NAP, five programme areas have
been formulated and discussed at the National Forum held at Maseru in March, 1998.
These five programme areas can be considered as different dimensions of the
programme, and each of these has been further structured with its own sets of
objectives and activities. The five programme areas provide the basis for strengthening
coordination and arriving at partnership arrangements to support various activities to be
undertaken for a successful implementation of the CCD in Lesotho.
The five programme areas of the NAP are:
1. Equity, Poverty Alleviation, Solidarity & Participation
2. Technical Measures to Alleviate the Pressures on the Natural Resources Base
3. Institutions, Organisation and Instrumentation
4. Knowledge Support, Learning and Communication
5. Drought Preparedness and Drought Relief Schemes.
During the Forum attention had been paid to Resource Mobilisation as yet another
programme area for NAP. However, in the programme it is integrated into programme
area 3.
Whereas the focus of the NAP (and the CCD) is on desertification control and
environmental rehabilitation, these five programme areas represent the different
dimensions of the NAP which all must be taken into account in order to effectively
address the land degradation problem.
The first programme area represents the poverty alleviation dimension of the NAP (and
the CCD). As the Rio Conference clearly has stated, poverty and environmental
degradation are closely interlinked. This programme area of the NAP conditions the
other programme areas to ensure explicit attention to the issues of equity, poverty
alleviation, solidarity and access to information and decision-making, and includes
measures in the realm of natural resource management which may improve the
economic environment to eradicate poverty.
The second programme area represents the technical dimension of the NAP, i.e. those
measures in environmental rehabilitation and natural resources management that can be
taken to alleviate the pressures on natural resource base.
National Environment Secretariat

--- Page 13 ---
CCD Lesotho National Action Programme
The third programme area is the institutional dimension, including the creation or
strengthening of government institutions and local organisation, measures to define
roles of Government, NGOs and communities, encourage active decentralization and
reach agreements on instrumentation and procedures; in brief, this programme area
deals with fostering an enabling environment.
The fourth programme area is concerned with the process dimension. It includes
measures to improve knowledge, and use this knowledge for learning and
communication. It creates enabling mechanisms for the NAP process.
The fifth and last programme area deals with emergency preparedness in the case of
droughts.
In the following sections of this chapter, each programme area will be described with
its basis for action, its objectives and the activities pertaining to each objective.
Programme Area 1: Equity, Poverty Alleviation, Solidarity & Participation
Basis for Action
Overall, Lesotho is a poor country with per capita GNP of US$650 (1995 World
Development Report). Eighty-two percent of the 1.9 million people of Lesotho lives in
the rural areas and 90% of those who live in the rural areas are poor2. Land degradation
in the form of depleted rangelands, barren soil conditions and gullies is prevalent,
especially in the more densely populated lowlands region of the country. Consequently,
current livelihood and resource-use systems are not able to maintain living standards.
Therefore, measures to alleviate poverty and reduce pressure on the land must be
sought and adopted.
It is a well known and accepted notion that poor people tend to not take proper care of
environment and the associated natural resources whilst their basic needs for food,
shelter and health are not met. As a consequence, therefore, rural people put more
pressure on their natural resource base than they would otherwise do in instances of
less poverty.
As has been indicated from the consultation process, lack of clear land ownership
policy was cited by rural communities as a limiting factor in proper land management.
Often, communities blame the chief for environmental degradation problems as he/she
is seen as the owner of the land and they as mere resource users. The confusion is
further exacerbated by the presence of Development Councils whose role has been to
2
See “Pathway out of poverty. An Action Plan for Lesotho. GOL,
Maseru. Lesotho.
National Environment Secretariat

--- Page 14 ---
CCD Lesotho National Action Programme
restrict the use of the resource base and application of heavy fines to culprits and less
on the proper use and better management of the land.
The NAP seeks, through programme area 1, to offset to the rural poor the negative
consequences of land degradation which express themselves as diminished access to
the use of natural resources. This programme area aims at using the limited resources
in a more intensive and, yet, productive and sustainable manner, and at engaging the
rural population gainfully in environmental rehabilitation works.
Objectives of Programme Area 1: Equity, Poverty Alleviation, Solidarity &
Participation
Programme area 1 has seven objectives (numbered 1.1 till 1.7):
1.1. Labour-intensive, environmentally sound farming systems
1.2. Employment opportunities for rural poor and women, in support of
environmental rehabilitation (e.g. private tree nursery production, fruit trees,
seed multiplication)
1.3. Opportunities for alternative livelihoods as a basis for reducing pressure on
land resources
1.4. Employment opportunities for rural poor / women in environmental
rehabilitation activities of a public nature or at community level (e.g. gabion
construction, plantation of common lands / through food or cash for work
1.5. Additional sources of income, particularly for rural poor / women, thereby
improving their living standards
1.6. Solidarity assistance by outsiders for activities beyond the capacity of the
village population (e.g. Lesotho Work camps Organisation, Lesotho Scouts
Organisation, Lesotho Red Cross, Military)
1.7. Access to information / awareness of all resource users of Government
programmes and responsibilities.
National Environment Secretariat

--- Page 15 ---
CCD Lesotho National Action Programme
Activities of Programme Area 1 (Poverty Alleviation, etc.)
Objective 1.1: Labour-intensive, environmentally sound farming systems;
1.1.1. Promote sustainable farm technologies with low external inputs for intensifying land
use (e.g. LEISA farming such as Machobane Farming System)
Objective 1.2: Employment opportunities, in support of environmental rehabilitation
1.2.1. Support privatization of tree nursery production, fruit trees, seed multiplication, etc.
by enabling local people / groups to produce vegetative materials needed in
programmes or projects of environmental rehabilitation and natural resources
management
Objective 1.3: Opportunities for alternative livelihoods to reduce pressure on land resources
1.3.1. Promote local production and marketing capacity as a means of developing alternative
livelihood systems that alleviate poverty
1.3.2. Establish and strengthen village associations focussed on economic activities of
common agricultural interest, e.g. market gardening
1.3.3. Promote the establishment and mobilization of rural credit and savings schemes
Objective 1.4: Employment opportunities in environmental rehabilitation activities of a public
nature
1.4.1. Contract local people for erosion control works on roads, trails and other sites of the
public domain (e.g. gabion construction, plantation of common lands / through food or
cash for work)
1.4.2. Organize and support local groups for rehabilitation works on common lands (e.g.
Environmental Youth Corps)
Objective 1.5: Additional sources of income, thereby improving the living standards of rural
poor.
1.5.1. Promote the establishment of entrepreneurship within rural groups to facilitate
establishment of rural cottage industries and business ventures.
Objective 1.6: Solidarity assistance for activities of resources rehabilitation which are
beyond the capacity of the village population
National Environment Secretariat

--- Page 16 ---
CCD Lesotho National Action Programme
1.6.1. Mobilize assistance for resource rehabilitation activities from voluntary organizations
(e.g. Lesotho Work camps Organisation, Lesotho Scouts Organisation, Lesotho Red
Cross, Military)
Objective 1.7: Access to information on Government programmes and responsibilities
1.7.1. Make the information on rights and obligations regarding natural
resources management accessible and available to rural people, particularly the poor
and landless
Programme Area 2: Measures to Alleviate the Pressures on Natural Resource Base
Basis for Action
In combating desertification on rangelands, rainfed cropland and irrigated land, it is important
to distinguish in the degree of severity of degradation of the land and the corresponding need
to address the desertification trend with appropriate measures. Desertification preventive
measures should be adopted in areas not yet affected or only slightly affected by the
desertification process. Desertification corrective measures should be implemented to sustain
the productivity of moderately desertified lands. Rehabilitation measures should be taken to
recover severely desertified lands.
In a fragile ecosystem such as Lesotho, natural resources management must focus on
establishing and maintaining adequate vegetation cover. An adequate vegetation cover would
promote and stabilize the hydrological balance and maintain land quality and land
productivity. These protective measures must be applied on lands not yet degraded.
Application of corrective measures and rehabilitation of moderately and severely degraded
lands should be through the introduction of environmentally sound, socially acceptable, fair
and economically feasible land use systems which will enhance the carrying capacity of the
land and maintain biotic resources.
Objectives of Programme Area 2: Technical Measures
Programme area 2 has five objectives (numbered 2.1 till 2.5):
2.1. Improved production systems in order to achieve greater productivity whilst
conserving natural resources and in the framework of integrated approach to rural
development;
2.2. Appropriate management of existing natural formations for the conservation of
biodiversity, watershed protection, sustainable production and agricultural
development in those areas not yet affected by desertification;
2.3. Rehabilitation through, inter alia, soil and water conservation, of moderately to
severely desertified drylands for productive utilisation and sustainable production;
National Environment Secretariat

--- Page 17 ---
CCD Lesotho National Action Programme
2.4. Increased vegetation cover and improved management of biotic resources in
regions affected or prone to desertification and drought through afforestation or
reforestation, agroforestry, community forestry and vegetation retention schemes;
2.5. Allocation of land to its best use.
Activities of Programme Area 2 (Technical Measures)
Objective 2.1: Improved production systems in order to achieve greater productivity whilst
conserving natural resources and in the framework of integrated approach to rural
development
2.1.1. Promote conservation agriculture such as Production Through Conservation (PTC)
2.1.2. Promote the use of high yielding varieties and genes to enhance high productivity per
unit (avoiding possible conflicts with biodiversity conservation through loss of local
varieties)
2.1.3. Promote the use of organic waste for soil fertility improvement
2.1.4. Promote the development and use of water harvesting and retention techniques
Objectives 2.2: Appropriate management of existing natural formations for watershed
protection, the conservation of biodiversity, sustainable production and agricultural
development in those areas not yet affected by desertification
2.2.1 Implement urgent direct preventive measures in vulnerable lands by introducing; 1)
improved land use policies and practices for more sustainable land productivity, 2)
appropriate, environmentally sound and economically feasible agricultural and
pastoral technologies, and 3) improved management of soil and water resources
2.2.2. Promote in situ protection and conservation of special ecological areas (e.g. high
altitude wetlands) through legislation and other means for purposes of combating
desertification while ensuring protection of biodiversity [see also 2.5.1]
Objective 2.3: Rehabilitation of moderately to severely desertified drylands for productive
utilisation and sustainable production
2.3.1. Carry out accelerated afforestation programmes using drought resistant, fast growing
species, in particular native ones, combined with community based agroforestry
schemes.
2.3.2. Implement urgent direct corrective measures in moderately to severely desertified
drylands, with a view to restoring and sustaining their productivity
National Environment Secretariat

--- Page 18 ---
CCD Lesotho National Action Programme
Objective 2.4: Increased vegetation cover and improved management of biotic resources in
regions affected or prone to desertification and drought
2.4.1. Promote participatory management of natural resources, including rangelands, to meet
both the needs of rural populations and conservation purposes, based on innovative or
adapted local technologies (e.g. Maboella, Grazing Associations, etc.).
2.4.2. Promote and encourage investment in forestry development in dryland areas through
various incentives (e.g. private land ownership, tax credits, etc), including legislative
means.
2.4.3. Promote the development and use of sources of energy which will lessen pressure on
local resources, including alternative sources of energy (e.g. electricity, biogas and
solar power) and improved stoves.
Objective 2.5: Allocation of land to its best use
2.5.1. Demarcate zones of appropriate types of land use as part of village level natural
resources management (e.g. areas appropriate for residential and urban development,
agricultural areas, grazing lands, areas to be protected);
2.5.2. Reallocate fields which are not properly used to other users / leaseholders
2.5.3. Protect mount-aux sources, springs and wells through legal provisions, law
enforcement and local management
Programme Area 3: Institutions, Organization & Learning
Basis for Action
The social systems interacting with land resources make the problem of desertification much
more complex, requiring an integrated approach to the planning and management of land
resources, while at the same time defining specific roles for each partner to perform. Action
plans to combat desertification and drought should include management aspects of
environment and development, thus conforming with the approach of integrating national
development plans and national environmental action plans.
For some time now, the Government of Lesotho has been advocating a balanced approach to
development; i.e. there must be popular participation in project formulation and
implementation. At present there seems to exist some difficulty in attaining this objective.
There is still a top-down approach to programme formulation and implementation. The
experiences gained on the successes and failures of past projects in Lesotho point to the need
for popular participation. The past projects did not apply a participatory approach to
National Environment Secretariat

--- Page 19 ---
CCD Lesotho National Action Programme
development and probably therefor met with limited success only. Some measure of success
is achieved in recent projects which do apply a participatory approach. However, the level of
popular participation is still inadequate. Hence, it is necessary to go beyond the theoretical
ideal of popular participation and focus on obtaining actual active popular involvement,
rooted in the concept of partnership. This means that there should be sharing of
responsibilities and mutual involvement of all parties with serious commitment to a long-term
common goal.
In context therefore, this programme area must be considered an essential supporting
component of all desertification control and drought relief activities.
Objectives of Programme Area 3: Institutions, Organization & Instrumentation
Programme area 3 has five objectives (numbered 3.1 to 3.5)
3.1. Capacity of village communities to take charge of their development and
management of their resources;
3.2. Strategic planning frameworks at al levels (for development, protection and
management of natural resources) that recognise individual roles of Government,
NGOs, user groups and communities, and integration of these plans into national
development plans;
3.3. Partnership between Government, at both national and local levels, other
executing agencies, non-governmental organisations and land users for the
planning and implementation of environmental rehabilitation and sustainable
natural resources management;
3.4. Support mechanisms to local communities in their efforts in combating
desertification and ensuring full participation;
3.5. Mechanisms for resource mobilization (cross-sectoral, national and international.
Activities of Programme Area 3 (Institutions, Organization, etc.)
Objectives 3.1: Capacity of village communities to take charge of their development and
management of their resources
3.1.1. Develop and adopt policies at the national level regarding a decentralized approach to
land-resource management, delegating responsibility to rural communities and
organizations.
3.1.2. Strengthen capacities and management skills of rural organizations and communities
to enable better management of village production and pastoral lands
Objective 3.2: Strategic planning framework at all levels (for development, protection and
management of natural resources) that recognizes individual roles of Government,
National Environment Secretariat

--- Page 20 ---
CCD Lesotho National Action Programme
organizations and communities, and this framework must enable integration of these plans
into national development plans
3.2.1. Establish co-ordination among ministries, institutions, and organizations working on
anti-desertification programmes at national and local levels. [ the intended role for
NES]
3.2.2. Develop specific sets of instruments and procedures for Strategic Environmental
Analysis (SEA), and Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) to be applied as part of
planning for natural resource management at District and village level
3.2.3. Develop District Environmental Strategies, and include these in the District
Development Plans
3.2.4. Establish local, national and intersectoral mechanisms to handle environmental and
developmental consequence on land use; e.g. Committees for natural resources
management and/or land use planning
3.2.5. Clarify and adjust to each other the roles of Land Use Planning Divisions in the
Ministry of Agriculture and in the Ministry of Local Government
Objective 3.3: Partnership between Government, at both national and local levels, other
executing agencies, non-governmental organizations and land users for the planning and
implementation of environmental rehabilitation and sustainable natural resources
management
3.3.1. Adopt policies and establish administrative structures for decentralized decision-
making and implementation for sustainable natural resources management
3.3.2. Strengthen the organization and capacity of user groups to plan and negotiate natural
resource management (e.g. Grazing Associations)
3.3.3. Create commitment for long-term goals on natural resources management of all
stakeholders
3.3.4. Establish District Committees for Natural Resources Management / Land Use
Planning
Objective3.4: Support mechanisms to local communities in their efforts in combating
desertification, and ensuring their full participation
3.4.1. Introduce legislative, institutional and financial measures to secure user involvement
National Environment Secretariat

--- Page 21 ---
CCD Lesotho National Action Programme
3.4.2. Establish guidelines for the use of incentives, allowances, subsidies, etc. for land
rehabilitation
3.4.3. Establish enforcement mechanisms conducive to fulfilling commitments from the
different partners concerning sustainable natural resources management and
rehabilitation
Objective 3.5: Mechanisms for resource mobilization (cross-sectoral, national and
international)
3.5.1. Monitor budgets and funding available for sustainable natural resources management
from government and non-government sources
3.5.2. Identify bottlenecks in funding for environmental rehabilitation
3.5.3. Establish rehabilitation funds at District and village level
3.5.4. Establish taxation mechanisms of the agricultural lands and of grazing fees on
(communal) grazing lands, and use those revenue at local level to manage grazing
lands and other common access resources
3.5.5. Establish mining fees, and use those revenues at local level to rehabilitate areas
affected by mining.
Programme Area 4: Knowledge Support, Learning & Communication
Basis for Action
Although there are a number of publications on soil erosion in Lesotho, the country still has
inadequate basic data and information on desertification and drought processes to enable
appropriate decision-making. Systematic observation systems that are helpful for the
development and implementation of effective anti-desertification programmes are inadequate.
The capacity of existing national institutions to generate and exchange relevant information
and systematic observation based on appropriate technology is also lacking in Lesotho. The
data sets and information embracing national and local levels are essential for understanding
the dynamics of desertification and drought processes. It is therefore important to develop
adequate measures to deal with desertification and drought and improve socio-economic
conditions. These could be achieved through a strong emphasis on (applied) research, gaining
thorough knowledge of the factors contributing to desertification, a strong monitoring and
assessment programme, and communication of this knowledge to planners.
Besides a better understanding of the physical processes that lead to desertification, a more
thorough understanding is warranted of the socioeconomic aspects of land degradation and
National Environment Secretariat

--- Page 22 ---
CCD Lesotho National Action Programme
natural resources utilization. Little is known, for instance, on the attitudes of rural people and
the sense of urgency they feel towards resource degradation in their own environment, and
the reasons why they have so far not yet massively resorted to rehabilitation and land use
intensification, even not in their own home gardens or farming fields. About these questions
one can find mainly hypotheses and suppositions, but no research data.
Objectives of Programme Area 4: Knowledge Support, Learning and Communication
Programme area 4 has eight objectives (numbered 4.1. till 4.8):
4.1. National environment information co-ordination centres that will act as focal points
for data collection and management and to provide standardisation in information
and back-up services;
4.2. Systematic observation networks linked to development of national systems for
observation of land degradation and desertification (caused by both climatic
fluctuations and human activities), and identify priority areas for action;
4.3. Permanent system for monitoring desertification and land degradation to provide
up to date information;
4.4. Long term relay process for development, implementation and monitoring
strategies related to resource management;
4.5. Process monitoring system based on agreed principles of interaction;
4.6. Integration of local knowledge and experience, with validation of indigenous
knowledge;
4.7. Understanding by partners of each other’s roles, needs, objectives and points of
view (by providing training, public awareness and open dialogue);
4.8. Understanding land tenure and customary rights for natural resources utilisation.
Activities of Programme Area 4 (Knowledge Support, Learning, etc.)
Objectives 4.1: National environment information co-ordination centres on desertification
4.1.1. Establish and strengthen environmental information systems at the national level.
4.1.2. Strengthen national and local environmental assessment and ensure
coordination/networking between environmental information and monitoring systems.
4.1.3. Strengthen the capacity of national institutions to analyse environmental data so that
ecological change can be monitored and environmental information obtained on a
continuing basis.
National Environment Secretariat

--- Page 23 ---
CCD Lesotho National Action Programme
Objective 4.2: Systematic observation networks linked to development of national systems for
observation of land degradation and desertification
4.2.1. Review and study the means for measuring the ecological, economic and social
consequences of desertification and land degradation and introduce the results of these
studies into desertification and land degradation assessment practices
4.2.2. Review and study the interactions between the socio-economic impacts of climate,
drought and desertification and use these results to identify priorities and to secure
concrete action
Objective 4.3: Permanent system for monitoring desertification and land degradation to
provide up to date information
4.3.1. Support the integrated data collection and research work of programmes related to
desertification and drought problems.
4.3.2. Support national programmes for integrated data collection and research networks
carrying out assessment of soil and land degradation (e.g. mapping and monitoring the
vegetation cover).
4.3.3. Strengthen national meteorological and hydrological networks and monitoring
systems to ensure adequate collection of basic information and communication among
national centres.
Objective 4.4: Long term relay process for development, implementation and monitoring
strategies related to resource management.
4.4.1. Establish national and local anti-desertification networks comprising authorities in
Government and local committees or associations of land users with a view to
strengthening coordination between all actors (from grass roots level to the highest
level of Government)
Objective 4.5.Process monitoring system based on agreed principles of interaction;
4.5.1. Establish monitoring systems that frequently feed-back to planning levels information
dealing with response and lessons learned which are relevant for future
implementation of environmental rehabilitation activities
Objective 4.6: Integration of local knowledge and experience, with validation of indigenous
knowledge
National Environment Secretariat

--- Page 24 ---
CCD Lesotho National Action Programme
4.6.1. Make study, at an early stage of planning for environmental rehabilitation, of
successful and/or innovative actions and experiences by local resource users and
authorities
4.6.2. Use successful cases for farmer-to-farmer exchange
4.6.3. Document successful cases for use in extension and awareness programmes
Objective 4.7: Understanding by partners of each others roles, needs, objectives and points of
view (by providing training, public awareness and open dialogue).
4.7.1. Establish and utilize mechanisms for the consultation and involvement of land users
and enhance capacity at the grass-roots level to identify and contribute to action
programmes.
4.7.2. Develop training programmes to increase the level of awareness and participation of
people, particularly of rural poor, women and local user groups.
4.7.3. Hold awareness campaigns for Village Chiefs, VDCs and DDCs.
4.7.4. Introduce community level educational systems to help spread knowledge among
affected groups.
Objective 4.8: Understanding land tenure and customary rights for natural resources
utilisation.
4.8.1. Study the relevance of local land tenure and customary rights for environmental
rehabilitation and sustainable natural resources management
4.8.2. Document lessons learned and formulate recommendations for modifications (if
needed) in land tenure and/or legislation at an early stage of planning environmental
rehabilitation programmes and projects
Programme Area 5: Drought Preparedness and Drought Relief Schemes
Basis for Action
Drought, in differing degrees of frequency and severity, is a recurring phenomenon in
Lesotho and the economic costs associated with drought-related disasters are high. During
periods of drought, there are costs associated with lost production, misused inputs and
diversion of development resources for drought relief. Drought has both human and physical
dimensions. Oftentimes and in desperate situations, people face food shortages and starvation
during drought periods. The physical dimensions of drought are expressed in terms of lost
vegetation cover that may lead to soil erosion when rains return.
National Environment Secretariat

--- Page 25 ---
CCD Lesotho National Action Programme
Therefore, early warning systems to forecast drought are necessary to enable drought
preparedness and implementation of drought-relief schemes. Integrated packages at the farm
and watershed level, such as alternative cropping strategies, soil and water conservation and
promotion of water harvesting techniques, could enhance the capacity of land to cope with
drought and provide basic necessities, thereby minimizing the need for emergency drought
relief. At the same time, contingency arrangements for relief are needed for periods of acute
drought and scarcity.
Objectives of Programme Area 5: Drought Preparedness and Drought Relief Schemes
Programme area 5 has three objectives (5.1. to 5.3):
5.1 National strategies for drought preparedness in both the short and the long
term, aimed at reducing the vulnerability of production systems to drought;
5.2 Early warning system to enable implementation of strategies for drought
intervention;
5.3 Drought relief schemes and means of coping with environmental refugees and
integrate them into national development planning.
Activities of Programme Area 5 (Drought Preparedness)
Objectives 5.1: National strategies for drought preparedness
5.1.1. Design strategies to deal with national food deficiencies in periods of production
shortfall; such as storage and stocks to be kept at all times, imports to supplement
existing national stocks and transport and distribution networks.
5.1.2. Improve national capacity for agro-meteorology and contingency crop planning
5.1.3. Establish contingency arrangements, where necessary, for food and fodder distribution
and water supply
5.1.4. Establish budgetary mechanisms for providing, at a short notice, resources for drought
relief.
5.1.5. Establish safety nets for the most vulnerable households.
Objective 5.2: Early warning system to enable implementation of strategies for drought
intervention
5.2.1. Develop early warning systems and strengthen the flow of early warning information
to decision makers.
Objective 5.3: Drought relief schemes and means of coping with environmental refugees
National Environment Secretariat

--- Page 26 ---
CCD Lesotho National Action Programme
5.3.1 Prepare rural projects for providing short-term rural employment to drought-affected
households to alleviate distress in times of drought.
5.3.2. Develop drought relief schemes and means of coping with environmental refugees
National Environment Secretariat

--- Page 27 ---
CCD Lesotho National Action Programme
CHAPTER 4: Operationalizing the NAP in Lesotho
4.1. Need for Partnership
Considering the efforts of the past by Government and other organizations, it is obvious that
the issue of land degradation in Lesotho is very old and continues to be a concern of many
people and organizations. Although the Government is keen to conserve the land and the land
based resources, this concern has not been met by individual Basotho assuming appropriate
responsibilities and initiatives. Although Basotho rural people realize the problem of land
degradation due to soil erosion, the efforts of Government supported programmes and of
NGOs to assist them in order to sustainably managing the natural resource base and
combating desertification have been unsuccessful as land degradation continues unabated.
Apparently the root causes of the land degradation problems have not yet been addressed. It is
possible, that this has been caused by partial views, professional bias, or lack of trust among
the persons concerned with combatting desertification.
Desertification is a cross-cutting environmental problem, whose effects and impacts transects
sectors, especially primary sectors such as agriculture and health. This has been recognized
by the Government of Lesotho which has worked to integrate all environmental problems,
including desertification, into sectoral planning. The Sectoral Round Table discussions which
were recently held in Lesotho from which sectoral development programmes such as
Agricultural Sector Investment Programme (ASIP) emanated are an example of Government
initiatives to integrate sectoral and environmental planning into national planning. The NES
was represented at these discussions which included primary sectors such as Agriculture,
Health and Tourism. The recognition that environmental problems, including desertification,
do not only affect the bio-physical aspects of land but also the socio-economic aspects of the
country, has led to emphasize the necessity of cross-sectoral planning and coordinated
implementation of environmental rehabilitation and natural resources management
programmes.
Cross-sectoral and coordinated efforts hence call for partnership among sector-wise organized
Government institutions, and between government and NGOs. Whatever success these
aforementioned groups may have in building partnership between themselves, the most
important partner in the effort to combat desertification, however, is the rural population.
The NAP is addressing the establishment of partnership links in its programme areas. The
first step in partnership building in the NAP implementation has to be at Government level
and with NGOs, in order to create the conditions conducive to real and committing local
participation and partnership with the rural Basotho.
There are a number of on-going programmes and projects in Lesotho with an important
component of land rehabilitation and natural resources management. Although they are being
implemented by different organizations, they have one commonality which makes them
National Environment Secretariat

--- Page 28 ---
CCD Lesotho National Action Programme
important towards land management in Lesotho. All projects are aimed at managing the land
resource better and to reduce its degradation. It is therefore appropriate that their efforts are
linked so as to make the most impact. Linkages could be built in many respects, amongst
which are the awareness of the existence of each other, joint efforts at the field level, and
holding seminars or meetings to discuss issues of common concern.
4.2. Coordinating Role of the NES
The NES is the Government agency responsible for co-ordinating activities related to the
preparation of the NAP document, implementation of programmes, monitoring and assessing
the impacts of programmes and international coordination in order to maximize the efficient
use of resources, to ensure responsive assistance, and to facilitate the implementation of
national action programmes and priorities under the CCD.
In addition to its co-ordination role in environment management, the NES is preparing itself
to play a more crucial role of protecting the country’s environment in the near future. The
NES will not only co-ordinate the efforts of other departments and organizations, but will also
enforce environmental protection in the country.
4.3. Relevant On-going Programmes, Projects and Activities
Land degradation has over the years received quite a considerable attention from Government
and other organizations. Several area based land rehabilitation and reclamation projects have
been undertaken in the past. These projects dated way back to the early seventies with the
implementation of the Thaba Bosiu Rural Development Project and the Khomo-Khoana
Development Project and, more recently, the Land Conservation and Range Development
Project.
There are currently a few programmes by Government and NGOs being undertaken to
combat land degradation and desertification. The Government programmes are under the
NES and the Ministry of Agriculture. According to its design, linkages will be established to
the Agricultural Sector Investment Programme (ASIP) now being elaborated. The other
programmes are done by a number of NGOs active in the field.
4.3.1. NES Programmes and Projects
Currently, the NES is running and co-ordinating two environmental programmes: the
National Environment Youth Corps (NEYC) and the Environmental Impact Assessment
(EIA). The NEYC programme functions to educate the youth about environment and how to
protect it. The youth are taught how to rehabilitate the degraded lands through soil
conservation methods. The programme now covers a greater portion of the country where
youth are planting trees and building stone structures in dongas and degraded lands. The
NEYC is also a poverty alleviation programme where youth are engaged in environmental
National Environment Secretariat

--- Page 29 ---
CCD Lesotho National Action Programme
enterprising; collecting and selling cans as they clean the environment and produce and sell
tree seedlings.
The Environmental Impact Assessment programme co-ordinates the efforts of other
ministries and departments in providing guidelines on environmental protection. The
Ministries and Departments the programme is currently involved with are the Ministry of
Works, Roads Construction Department, the Ministry of Natural Resources, Lesotho
Highlands Development Authority (particularly in dam and road construction and the
relocation programme), the Ministry of Tourism, sports and Culture and other related
ministries.
The activities of the NEYC and EIA programmes are designed to pre-empt land degradation
by raising awareness among the youth on land degradation issues and providing guidelines on
environmental protection, respectively. The two NES programmes are intended to prevent
land degradation, rehabilitate and reclaim degraded lands. These programmes work in line
with the objectives of the CCD. Their activities must thus be extended and included in the
overall objectives of the NAP.
In addition, a small number of cross-sectoral and innovative pilot projects is being supported
by NES. These are the Drakensberg Maloti Mountains Conservation Programme and the
Maloti-Drakensberg Transfrontier Programme.
4.3.2. Agriculture Programmes and Activities
The sector most directly intertwined with environment in Lesotho is agriculture. All
agricultural activities directly affect environmental components, such as vegetation,
biodiversity, water, etc. Due to an apparent lack of adequate technical know-how in land
management by the Lesotho land resources users, agriculture seems to be impacting in a
negative sense in the environmental quality of the country. Current agricultural activities are
degrading Lesotho’s environment as there are soil erosion, caused by bad agricultural
practices, and overgrazing in the rangelands, low crop and animal productivity and excessive
ecosystem destruction due to over-utilisation and over-harvesting of wood resources.
The Ministry of Agriculture has several programmes that deal with the conservation of soil,
water and other related environmental components. These programmes are led by the
Department of Conservation, Forestry and Land Use Planning (DCFL) and Range
Management Division (RMD) of the Department of Livestock Services. The DCFL has over
the years operated soil conservation programmes that dealt with rehabilitating degraded lands,
donga rehabilitation and tree planting. Currently however the DCFL is placing emphasis on
watershed management as a means of halting the degradation of rangelands and reducing soil
erosion. In cultivated lands, the department is emphasising conservation farming through the
programme of Production Through Conservation (PTC).
National Environment Secretariat

--- Page 30 ---
CCD Lesotho National Action Programme
In addition, the RMD of the Department of Livestock Services plays a crucial role in advising
Basotho rangeland users on ways to better manage their grazing areas. Through the
programme of Range Management Areas (RMAs) the Division is advancing the vegetative
soil erosion control concept (VSECC). The VSECC is based on the understanding that the
ecological balance will be restored and rates of soil erosion and runoff will be reduced to
acceptable levels when vegetative cover and top soil conditions are improved and provided
there is good management of cultivated and grazing lands. The Division recognizes that in
order to attain an ecological equilibrium in rangelands, in which soil fertility, productivity and
infiltration rates are increasing and soil erosion and runoff are decreasing, there must be
involvement of land users as managers of the land rather that just users of the land.
The Agricultural Sector Investment Programme (ASIP) aims at improving the productivity of
the agricultural sector through a number of measures, including a unified agricultural
extension service. In the framework of ASIP, additional projects are in the pipeline, such as
the IFAD-funded Sustainable Agriculture Development Programme for the Mountain Areas
(SADPMA) and the World Bank proposed Agricultural Policy and Capacity Building Project.
The current proposals are in line with the ambitions of the NAP and, among others, stress the
need for coordination through NES and aim at decentralized planning for natural resources
management.
These programmes of the Ministry of Agriculture as set out in the ASIP must therefore be
linked with the activities of the NAP so as partnerships are built, maximum impact is effected
and duplication of efforts is avoided.
4.3.3. NGOs Programmes and Activities
There are other land management programmes in the country, operated by Non-
Governmental Organizations. These programmes are mostly rehabilitation work and
improvement of crop production. The leading and very active programmes are the Mafeteng
and Phamong crop production improvement run by Rural Self-Help Development
Association, the Taung land rehabilitation and tree planting programme run by World Vision
(Lesotho), the Sebapala and Mphaki tree planting by Durham-Lesotho Link, and the crop
production improvement by Machobane Farming Systems Foundation.
4.4. Selection of Lead Institutions for the NAP
A desk study of Government institutions and NGOs was undertaken prior to the National
Forum in order to identify and assess their activities in relation to land management,
combating land degradation, mitigating the effects of drought and preservation of the land
based resources. The review was also done to identify institutions and organizations that
could assume a leading co-ordination and facilitation role in the implementation of activities
within the various components of the NAP.
National Environment Secretariat

--- Page 31 ---
CCD Lesotho National Action Programme
The institutions and organizations were assessed on the following aspects:
1. Activities related to soil conservation, inter alia, tree planting, donga reclamation, etc.
2. Long term vision for the country in terms of land management and combating
desertification
3. Track record in terms of the number of land management programmes that have been
undertaken in the past
4. Current and planned activities related to desertification control and mitigating the
effects of drought
5. Coverage in terms of scope of land area to be realistically covered in the near future.
6. Means and methods of financing own activities.
Both Government institutions and Non-Governmental Organizations were assessed.
These are:
Government:: Non-Governmental Organizations:
* Mafeteng Rural Development * Plenty Lesotho
Project * Africa 2000 Network
* Department of Conservation, * Rural Self-Help Development Association
Forestry and Land Use Planning * Durham-Lesotho Link
* Range Management Division of * Lesotho Red Cross Society
the Department of Livestock * Machobane Agricultural Development
Services Foundation
* Research Division * CARE Lesotho
* Department of Chieftainship * Christian Council of Lesotho
Affairs * World Vision International (Lesotho)
* Department of Rural Development
As a result of this assessment, the following organizations are considered the lead institutions
for the implementation of the NAP in Lesotho:
Of the Government:
The Ministry of Agriculture, and in particular, its Department of Conservation, Forestry and
Land Use Planning, and the Range Management Division of the Department of Livestock
Services.
Of the NGOs:
Durham-Lesotho Link
Machobane Agricultural Development Foundation
National Environment Secretariat

--- Page 32 ---
CCD Lesotho National Action Programme
World Vision (Lesotho)
Rural Self-Help Development Association
These organizations are considered leaders in the field of planning and implementing natural
resources management programmes and projects. Their leadership notwithstanding, a close
coordination and partnership with others remains necessary for the effective implementation
of the NAP according to its five programme areas and objectives
4.5. Establishment of a National Desertification Steering Committee
In compliance with the terms of the CCD as stipulated in Article 19 (a), Lesotho has set-up a
National Desertification Steering Committee to oversee the elaboration and implementation
of the NAP. The CCD recognises the crucial role that science and technology play in
combating desertification and mitigating the effects of drought. Also, Lesotho recognises the
important role multiple groups would play in the elaboration and implementation of the NAP.
Therefore a multidisciplinary steering committee has been set up to help strengthen the NAP
process, forge closer technical and scientific coordination, assist in the transfer, adaptation
and acquisition of technologies. The NDSC is therefore expected to evolve appropriate
technologies to combat desertification and mitigate the effects of drought, give advice on
their possible acquisition and application, as well as socializing the NAP process to be a
people’s process. It is important that the committee take a leading role in facilitating the
elaboration and implementation of the NAP and articulating the role of concerned parties in
the whole process.
4.5.1. Functions of the NDSC
The NDSC has already played an important role in the preparatory activities, such as
consultations, which have led to the present NAP-documents.
The functions of the NDSC include:
‚ Determine the most appropriate ways and means to combat desertification and mitigate
the effects of drought.
‚ Ensure popular participation in sustainable land management programmes and
activities at all stages of the NAP; i.e. design, implementation, monitoring and
evaluation.
‚ Catalyse partnership building among all stakeholders in the spirit of the CCD.
‚ Diversify and strengthen multi-funding sources for the support of NAP process and, in
particular, determine the convenience of establishing a National Desertification Fund
(or otherwise named fund for natural resources rehabilitation) and other means of
resource mobilization.
National Environment Secretariat

--- Page 33 ---
CCD Lesotho National Action Programme
4.5.2. Composition, Procedure and Financing
The NDSC is composed of one representative from NES as co-ordinator of the Committee,
two representatives from the Ministry of Agriculture, one representative each from the
Ministry of Natural Resources, Ministry of Home Affairs, Disaster Management Authority
and the National University of Lesotho and two representatives from NGOs whose activities
involve land management, combating land degradation, and mitigating the effects of drought.
To activate its operations and achieve maximum impact, the NDSC will establish a system of
ad hoc panels to elaborate and deliberate on specific issues of concern within the context of
NAP so as to effect its implementation. The panels will be composed of respective
stakeholders and eminent experts dealing with the relevant issue and shall make appropriate
recommendations to the NDSC for further recommendation.
In furtherance of its objectives, the NDSC together with the NES will set up in every District
a District Desertification Steering Committee (DDSC) or District Natural Resources
Management Committee (DNRMC). These District Committees will be responsible and
report to the NDSC, acting as relays to and working under the supervision of the NDSC. The
probable membership of the DDSC or DNRMC could be the District Secretary as its chair,
one representative of NGOs active in the District, two members of the Local Government
(DDC and Chieftainship) and one member from the Ministry of Agriculture at the District
Level (preferably a Department active in natural resource management).
4.5.3. NDSC Relationship with NES
The NES is a focal point for the co-ordination of CCD activities in Lesotho. Therefore, the
NDSC must be responsible to and work in consultation with the NES, and report on a
scheduled basis on its progress and performance. The NDSC will propose its own rules of
procedure for approval by the NES and will propose mechanisms for financial resource
mobilization. The NES is to consider these proposals in consultation with the NDSC and must
approve of the NDSC’s undertaking. The relationship of the NDSC and the NES must be
mutual and with a common purpose of better managing the natural resource base of Lesotho,
combating desertification and mitigating the effects of drought.
In view of the recent changes in the status of the NES, through the creation of the Ministry of
Environment, Gender and Youth Affairs, of which NES has become a Department, the
functions of the NDSC may have to be redefined. Furthermore, the role of the NDSC viz-a-
viz the (proposed) National Environmental Council, and its relation with other Committees
that are established to oversee the elaboration and implementation of Agenda 21 and parts
thereof must be defined at its earliest convenience.
It is obvious that combating desertification must not be done in isolation as the effects have
gone far beyond the basic requirements of the CCD of preventing land degradation,
rehabilitating partly degraded lands and reclaiming desertified lands. The measures stated in
National Environment Secretariat

--- Page 34 ---
CCD Lesotho National Action Programme
programme areas one through five of the NAP must also be coupled with the efforts of other
Conventions such as Convention on Conservation of Biological Diversity and Climate
Change.
4.6. Monitoring and Evaluation
The purpose of the NAP is to formulate and implement CCD and its related components. The
process of NAP involves a complex array of interventions from different sectors and at
various levels. Planning and implementation of activities should benefit from experiences of
previous implementation. The NAP is an iterative process and a learning process. Monitoring
and evaluating the NAP process during its implementation is therefore important for its
management and co-ordination. The purpose of monitoring and evaluating the NAP is to
assess the long term success of the programme in terms of its effectiveness in reducing the
scourge and rate of land degradation and its positive impacts on the socio-economic
conditions of the affected communities.
As a process, the NAP evolved with set targets focussing on key issues that have been agreed
upon to constitute an effective programme. Therefore, a set of carefully selected and
predetermined indicators will assist to gauge the progress and impacts of programmes
throughout their respective stages of implementation. An initial step in the implementation of
the NAP is to determine a set of indicators from which baseline information can be collected
and from which further evaluation of the process can be done. Baseline information on the
status of the land in Lesotho can be collected using modern technologies. Monitoring of land
degradation and the gains made to reverse land degradation using a set of predetermined
indicators can be monitored using remote sensing and Geographic Information Systems
(GIS). Baseline data is needed to help accommodate comparison of important trends and to
help in the improvement of programme implementation.
A set of indicators and the methods to measure them are indicated in Annex 1. A number of
monitoring and assessment indicators can be used at the beginning of the programme
implementation to enable acquisition of the baseline data. These indicators can be categorized
as 1) ecological, 2) climatic, 3) economic and 4) socio-cultural indicators. The report
‘Desertification in Lesotho’ (Chakela and Seitlheko, 1995) which was prepared at the start of
the NAP preparations, provides more suggestions for specific indicators.
Ridgway (1995: op.cit. Chakela and Seitlheko, 1995) has suggested the following criteria to
select desertification indicators at field level:
‚ they should relate closely to the land use and management practices being applied by
the land users, who are able to draw on well founded indigenous knowledge base
when monitoring the state of the environment;
‚ they should be able to demonstrate changes over relatively short time periods, 5-10
years, in terms of productivity, environmental degradation and its abatement;
National Environment Secretariat

--- Page 35 ---
CCD Lesotho National Action Programme
‚ they should be able to distinguish short-term phenomena of degradation from longer-
term processes of desertification so taking account of resilience;
‚ they should be able to be applied in standard format over different locations that are
used by different people.
In addition to the use of indicators, the NAP will also seek other ways of monitoring he
process of land rehabilitation or land degradation. Through the participatory approach
advocated in the NAP, agreements will be reached with stakeholders on the nature of the
desertification problem, its trends – if unchecked, and the common goal of environmental
rehabilitation and the respective responsibilities and commitments of the parties involved.
Monitoring of the NAP process shall then also be facilitated by a system of frequent
reporting, from local level upwards, of responses, lessons learned and other unplanned events
resulting from the process. Such a kind of monitoring system, though often qualitative and
subjective, may provide valuable inputs on responses, behaviour, demands, initiatives and/or
failures which a monitoring systems with sets of indicators may fail to detect. Desertification
in Lesotho is an anthropogenic problem. Putting people at the hearth of a monitoring system
may reveal more effectively the potential and limitations of mobilizing social dynamics for
the healing of the land than the use of formal indicators would be able to do.
National Environment Secretariat

--- Page 36 ---
CCD Lesotho National Action Programme
CHAPTER 5: Priority Areas for Action
5.1. Selection of Priorities for Action
The thematic focus of the NAP is desertification control and environmental rehabilitation.
The core concern is conservation and sustainable use of the natural resources, land, water and
vegetation.
The priority for combating desertification in Lesotho is based on the implementation of
preventive measures for lands that are not yet degraded, or which are slightly degraded.
However, the severely degraded areas are not neglected but measures to reclaim them are to
be undertaken. Since desertification and drought affect more severely the rural communities,
priority attention is given to these groups throughout the country. In combating desertification
and mitigating the effects of drought, participation of local communities, rural organizations,
National Government, Non-Governmental Organizations and international and regional
organizations is essential. Partnerships will be built to enhance effective implementation of
programmes and activities.
The technical measures to control desertification and to rehabilitate the land are well known.
Throughout the country soil conservation and erosion control works of good technical quality
can be seen. Knowledge is available on improved and sustainable cropping systems, range
management, agroforestry and reforestation. However, these have been the result of efforts
driven by organizations (government and NGO) and reflect the concern of outsiders to the
rural community. Maintenance of erosion control and soil conservation works by the users or
by the rural community is rare, in general.
The challenge for the NAP is to change the land use practices of the rural Basotho from the
mining (depletion) of natural resources to effective, ecologically sound and more productive
land and animal husbandry.
In order to meet this challenge the priorities for action will be to establish better rapport
between government services and the needs and aspirations of the rural communities. The
initial actions on this path pertain to the socioeconomic and anthropological domain:
First, the priorities of the different types of user groups need to be better understood, as well
as eventual local (and perhaps hidden) conflicts between different groups in the rural
societies, paying particular attention to the most disadvantaged groups such as landless
families;
Secondly, a good understanding is needed of the local customs of resource allocation, the
application of sanctions when resources are abused, and the sense of social justice which
justify these local customs – this may differ from one community to the other;
Thirdly, local perceptions on natural resource degradation need to be compared with the
perceptions of specialists. Discussion of differences in perception, combined with illustration
through field visits, and the visualization of scenarios with and without improved practices of
National Environment Secretariat

--- Page 37 ---
CCD Lesotho National Action Programme
land husbandry and rehabilitation should result in a common understanding between
community and outsiders of trends in availability of natural resources viz-a-viz the needs of
the (increasing) population;
Fourth, based on the common understanding of natural resource degradation and possible
measures to arrest degradation and land rehabilitation, commitment must be sought for a long
term goal of sustainable natural resources management;
Finally, based on the previous steps, a framework of action for natural resources management
for the medium- and long-term should be sketched and a short-term plan of activities be
defined, with clear specification of tasks, inputs needed, sources of inputs, responsibilities,
commitment, and sanctions for not complying.
The set a actions described above will be applied at the village level. At the District level a
number of actions will be undertaken in order to support action at village level, by a number
of workshops, such as for the awareness raising of village chiefs and VDCs, and preparing
District and community level field workers of government and NGOs for this participatory
approach.
In depth studies of a specific nature will also be done. For example, a poverty analysis in
selected priority communities.
5.2. Selection of Geographic Priorities
Besides priorities for action, priorities will be established to address degradation in specific
geographical regions of the country.
For the NAP, the priority geographical areas are the Districts of Mafeteng, Mohale’s Hoek
and Quthing, as well as a part of Maseru District in the South-West of Lesotho (Mafura,
pers.com). Of the ten districts in the country, the three Eastern and mostly mountainous
districts of Mokhotlong, Thaba Tseka and Qacha’s Nek are much less populated and are
being covered under ASIP by the proposed IFAD-funded Sustainable Agricultural
Development Programme (SADPMA) which in its design includes most of the elements
contained in the five programme areas of the NAP. In comparison with the remaining
districts, the selected priority district present more serious degradation problems.
For example, places such as Mafeteng which used to be the bread-basket for Lesotho are
much desertified and are unable to produce crops satisfactorily. Also the season at which
crops were to be produced have somewhat shifted. That is, planting maize at the regular time
of October and November often leads to poor yields because of failure to satisfactorily
pollinate in hotter months of January and February in Mafeteng and Mohale’s Hoek. The
problem of poor yields in these districts is further compounded by early frost incidents.
Planting in December, as is now being done by the area farmers is also not a sure bet either
due to early frosts that often obliterates these crops. Thus these places are often poorly
planted and in drought years are not planted at all.
National Environment Secretariat

--- Page 38 ---
CCD Lesotho National Action Programme
The desert-like conditions in Mafeteng and Mohale’s Hoek where soils are also barren have
seriously impacted the social fabric of these areas. There are now more social conflicts in
these districts.
National Environment Secretariat

--- Page 39 ---
CCD Lesotho National Action Programme
ANNEXE
Field level indicators of Desertification.
Indicator Category Methods of Measurement
National Environment Secretariat

--- Page 40 ---
CCD Lesotho National Action Programme
1. Ecological Indicators Water Status : Amount of annual and seasonal water deficits
: Length of dry season over years
: Annual, seasonal, and inter-seasonal rainfall amounts, distribution and intensity
: Ground water depth in wells and aquifers
Soil Properties: Depth of soil over root inhibition zone
: Soil fertility in N.P.K amounts, organic matter and organic carbon content
: Presence of soil crusts causing surface sealing and development of small areas with swept
appearance to large bare areas swept and packed
: Dust and dust storms and wind erosion status, rate and hazard
Soil-Water relations : Water erosion status, rate and hazard as measured by density of rills and
gullies, rate of mass movement, thickness of top soil, organic matter content, quantity and type of
sediment deposits downstream and in dams, slope angle, presence of vegetational cover, soil texture,
permeability and erodibility.
Vegetation : Vegetation characteristics as measured by its quality, growth form, rate of
regeneration and succession in formerly cultivated and disturbed fields or grazing lands, change in
perennial and annual composition, woody and herbaceous litter, prevalence of key species and
vegetational yield and productivity.
National Environment Secretariat

--- Page 41 ---
CCD Lesotho National Action Programme
2. Climatic Indicators Rainfall patterns : Decrease in rainfall as measured by daily, monthly and annual rainfall
totals
: Cloud types
: Rainfall variability during the wet season
Wind patterns : Wind directions and speed
3. Economic Indicators Cash income : Rate and degree of fluctuations of cash incomes available to meet felt needs and
financial obligations
Redistribution of wealth : Social mechanisms for wealth distribution and their effectiveness,
lobola, mafisa, feasts, festivals, funerals, etc.
Production Systems : Diversity of production systems as measured by the degree of diversity
of array of production systems and resource availability to community
National Environment Secretariat

--- Page 42 ---
CCD Lesotho National Action Programme
4. Socio-cultural Indicators Population density : Population estimates and fertility rates
Social processes : Extent of conflicts and marginalization
: Breakdown of patterns of redistribution and forced out migrations
: Discontinuities between subsistence and cash income economies
Raising Awareness : Rate of formation of effective farmer conservation groups and of farmer to
farmer training programmes
: Extent of local NGOs training schemes
: Local incentive programmes for abatement of desertification
Tree Planting : Rate of uptake of farmers in the planting and care of trees
Conservation works: Rate of adoption of soil conservation technologies
: Lengths and numbers of physical bunds and terraces constructed and buffer strips laid out
: Improvement of soil fertility and structure
Agroforestry : Rate of incorporation of agroforestry into existing cultivation practices in
dryland farming
National Environment Secretariat

--- Page 43 ---
CCD Lesotho National Action Programme
National Environment Secretariat