--- Page 1 ---
Government of the Republic of Zambia
Ministry of Tourism, Environment and Natural Resources
ZAMBIA NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMME
FOR COMBATING
DESERTIFICATION & MITIGATING SERIOUS EFFECTS
OF DROUGHT IN THE CONTEXT OF THE
UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION TO COMBAT
DESERTIFICATION
(NAP Document as of 28 February 2002)

--- Page 2 ---
FOREWORD
Desertification is a world phenomenon, which describes the gradual loss of productivity
in soils and vegetation in drylands and sub-humid areas due to processes such as soil
erosion and declining soil fertility exacerbated by both human activities and climatic
variations.
Zambia, like most developing countries has been experiencing severe drought for the past
years. This has greatly affected the country’s capacity for food production and ultimately
has affected its food security. Therefore, the drought accompanied with soil erosion and
declining soil fertility has undermined the people’s living conditions, especially those that
are solely dependent on agricultural production.
It is with this background that Zambia welcomed and signed the Convention to Combat
Desertification in those countries experiencing serious drought and/or desertification,
particularly in Africa (CCD). Zambia signed the Convention on 15th October 1994 and
ratified it on 19th September 1996.
As a party to the Convention, Zambia was requested to prepare a National Action
Programme that provides a framework to incorporate long-term strategies to combat
desertification and mitigate the effects of drought with national policies for sustainable
development. This is in line with the UNCCD objectives under Articles 2, 9 and 10
where the formulation and implementation of National Action Programmes forms the
core to the implementation of the Treaty.
The preparation of this document was made possible through funding made available by
United Nations Support Office (UNSO) through the United nations Development
Programme (UNDP) to whom we are greatly indebted.
On behalf of the Government of the Republic of Zambia and indeed on my own behalf, I
would like to express sincere gratitude to the consultant and all the participants who were
involved in various workshops and those who worked tirelessly to make this Report
possible.
Hon. Levison A. Mumba
Minister of Tourism, Environment and Natural Resources
ii

--- Page 3 ---
Table of Contents
Foreword
List of Acronyms
Executive Summary
CHAPTER ONE: BACKGROUND
1.1 The United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification …………… 1
1.1.1 Definitions of Terms……………………………………………. 2
1.1.2 Ratification of the UNCCD…………………………………….. 3
1.1.3 The National Action Programme and the Process……………… 3
1.1.4 Guiding Principles………………………………………………. 5
1.1.5 The NAP Area and Scope………………………………………. 6
1.2 Zambia…………………………………………………………………. 6
1.2.1 Country Setting……………………………………...………….. 6
1.2.2 Biological Resources……………………………………………. 12
1.2.3 Social Economic Environment………………………………….. 15
1.3 Environmental Problems .…………………..…….…………………… 19
1.4 Status of Desertification…………..……………………….…………… 20
CHAPTER TWO: THE DESERTIFICATION PROBLEM IN ZAMBIA
2.1 Root Causes of Desertification Associated Problems………………………. 23
2.1.1. Natural, Environmental Factors……………………….……….. 23
2.1.2. Social Economic Factors……………….…….………………… 27
2.1.3. Institutional, Policy and Legal Issues…………………………… 31
2.2 Manifestations and Effects of Desertification Problems……..…………. 32
2.3 The Implications of the Desertification Problem…………………….… 35
CHAPTER THREE: RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN NAP AND OTHER
PROGRAMMES: AN ANALYSIS
3.1 Analysis of multi-sectoral Environmental Programmes in
relation to the NAP……………………………………………….……. 37
3.2 Analysis of other Environmental and Natural Resources Programmes
in relation to the NAP…………………………………………………. . 40
3.3 Analysis of Programmes promoting Sustainable Development
in relation to the NAP…………………………………………………. . 43
3.4 Other on-going programmes in relation to the NAP…...……………... . 46
iii

--- Page 4 ---
CHAPTER FOUR: ACTION PROGRAMME AREAS AND PROJECTS
4.1 Programme Vision……………………………………………………... 47
4.2 Programme Purpose…………………………………………………… 47
4.3 Programme Objectives…………………………………………………. 47
4.4 Identified Programme Areas of Intervention….………………………... 47
4.5 Logical Framework and the Action Plan: ………………………………... 54
CHAPTER FIVE: IMPLEMENTATION AND CO-ORDINATION ARRANGEMENT
5.1 Institutional Flow Chart………………………………………………… 58
5.2 International Co-operation and Partnership arrangements….………….. 64
5.3 Collaboration between NAP, ESP and other programmes
contributing to sustainable Development…………………...………….. 65
5.4 Other Institutional Measures…………………………………………… 65
5.5 Funding Sources and Mechanisms…….……………………….………. 66
CHAPTER SIX: CONCLUSION..……………………………………….. 69
REFERENCES
iv

--- Page 5 ---
List of Figures
Figure 1 Location of Zambia
Figure 2 Zambia’s Agro-ecological Zones
Figure 3 Major Rivers of Zambia
Figure 4 Vegetation Types of Zambia
Figure 5 Extent of Desertification in Zambia
Figure 6 Annual Rainfall (mm) per Province
Figure 7 Maize production (kg) from 1987 to 1999
Figure 8 Institutional Flow Chart
Figure 9 Flow Chart of the Relationship between PMU and other Committees
List of Tables
Table 1: Vegetation Types of Zambia
Table 2: Provincial Average Rainfall and Rainy Days
Table 3: Tree species extensively used and which are under Pressure in Luangwa Valley
Table 4: Budget Estimates for NAP Implementation
Table 5: Identified Stakeholder Groups and their roles in the NAP process
Appendices
Appendix I: Some Environmental Conventions to which Zambia is a Party
Appendix II: Episodic climatic Events in Zambia
Appendix III: Programme Matrix: Main Programme Objectives, Programme Outputs and
Interventions
List of Boxes
Box 1: Long Term Measures to be included in the NAP
Box 2: The NAP Process
Box 3: Agro-ecological Zones in Zambia
v

--- Page 6 ---
LIST OF ACRONYMS
ACP - Agricultural Commercialisation Programme
ADMADE - Administrative Management Design
ASIP - Agricultural Sector Investment Programme
CBD - Convention on Biological Diversity
CBNRM - Community Based Natural Resources Management Programme
CBO - Community Based Organisation
CCD - Convention to Combat Desertification
CHAPOSA - Charcoal Potential in Southern Africa
CEMP - Community Environmental Management Programme
CRBS - Community Resource Boards
CSS - Country Support Strategies
CSO - Central Statistical Office
COP - Conference of Parties
DANNIDA - Danish Development Agency
DCF - Donor Community Facilitator
DHS - Demographic Health Survey
DDCC - District Development Co-ordination Committee
DMMU - Disaster Management and Mitigation Unit
DOM - Department of Meteorology
EEPA - Environmental Education and Public Awareness Programme
ECA - Economic Commission for Africa
ECZ - Environmental Council of Zambia
EIA - Environmental Impact Assessment
EPPCA - Environmental Protection and Pollution Control Act
ESP - Environment Support Programme
EU - European Union
FAO - Food and Agricultural Organisation
FINNIDA - Finnish Development Agency
FRA - Food Reserve Agency
GDP - Gross Domestic Product
GM - Global Mechanism
GMAS - Game Management Areas
GRZ - The Government of the Republic of Zambia
GTZ - German Technical Aid to Zambia
HIV/AIDs - Human Immuno Deficiency Virus/Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome
ICBD - Integrated Conservation of Dry Land Biodiversity Project
IFAD - International Fund for Agricultural Development
ILO - International Labour Organisation
IMF - International Monetary Fund
ITCZ - Inter-Tropical Convergence Zone
IUCN - International Conservation Union
JFMS - Joint Forestry Management Systems
JICA - Japan International Co-operation Agency
vi

--- Page 7 ---
LADP - Local Area Development Programme
LFA - Logical Framework Approach
LIRDP - Luangwa Integrated Resource Development Project
LM&CF - Land Management and Conservation Farming Project
MACO - Ministry of Agriculture and Co-operatives
MAFF - Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Fisheries
MCDSS - Ministry of Community Development and Social Services
MCT - Ministry of Communications and Transport
MENR - Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources
MEWD - Ministry of Energy and Water Development
MIB - Ministry of Information and Broadcasting
MLGH - Ministry of Local Government and Housing
MoL - Ministry of Lands
MoFED - Ministry of Finance and Economic Development
MoFNP - Ministry of Finance and National Planning
MPP - Micro-projects programme
MTENR - Ministry of Tourism, Environment and Natural Resources
NCCD - National Co-ordination Committee on Desertification and Drought
NAP - National Action Programme
NBSAP - National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Programme
NCS - National Conservation Strategy
NCDP - National Commission for Development Planning
NDF - National Desertification Fund
NEAP - National Environmental Action Programme
NERP - New Economic Recovery Programme
NEWS - National Early Warning
NFP - National Focal Point System
NGO - Non –Government Organisation
NIP - National Indicative Programme
NISIR - National Institute for Scientific and Industrial Research
NMDC - National Ministerial Desertification Committee
NORAD - Norwegian Ministry for Development Co-operation
NSC - National Steering Committee
PACD - United Nations Conference on Desertification
PAM - Prevention against Malnutrition
PDCC - Provincial Development Co-ordination Committee
PEF - Pilot Environmental Fund
PFAP - Provincial Forestry Action Programme
PMU - Programme Management Unit
PRSP - Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
SADC - Southern Africa Development Community
SAP - Structural Adjustment Programme
SCAFE - Soil Conservation and Agroforestry Project
SIDA - Swedish International Development Agency
SLAMU - South Luangwa Area Management Unit
SRP - Social Recovery Project
vii

--- Page 8 ---
SSN - Social Safety Net
SSRP - Social Sector Rehabilitation Programme
UNCED - United Nations Convention on Environment and Development
UNCCD - United Nation Convention to Combat Desertification and
UNDP - United Nations Development Programme
UNEP - United Nations Environment Programme
UNESCO - United Nations Educational and Scientific Organisation
UNFCCC - United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
UNSO - United Nations Support Office
UNZA - University of Zambia
VAGS - Village Action Groups
VAM - Vulnerability Assessments and Management
WCRF - Wildlife Conservation Revolving Fund
WCS - World Conservation Strategy
WMO - World Meteorological Organisation
WFP - World Food Programme
YWCA - Young Women Christian Association
ZAMSIF - Zambia Social Investment Fund
ZARD - Zambia Association for Research and Development
ZAW - Zambia Alliance for Women
ZAWA - Zambia Wildlife Authority
ZFAP - Zambia Forestry Action Programme
ZNBSAP - Zambia National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan
viii

--- Page 9 ---
Executive Summary
1.1 The United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification
One of the main and long standing environmental problems that has been recognised by
the international community to affect social economic development the world over, is the
intertwined issue of desertification and drought. Desertification has profound impacts,
manifested in the general decline in land productivity, leading to a reduction of the land’s
biological potential and economic ability to sustain life. This has led to widespread
poverty and human misery. This problem is compounded by the effects of climatic
variations, in particular the occurrence of severe droughts. The problem is more serious in
African developing countries due to lack of financial resources, technological know-how
and capacity to combat the problem. Zambia has not been spared from the scourge of land
degradation especially during the past ten (10) years.
The UNCCD was initiated in 1994 and it came into force in 1996 after the 1992 Rio Earth
Summit. Zambia signed and ratified the Convention in 1994 and 1996 respectively.
The UNCCD aims at combating desertification and mitigating the effects of drought by
promoting effective action through innovative local programmes and supportive
international partnerships. This is done through developing and carrying out national
action programmes. These action programmes must adopt a democratic, bottom-up
approach and should emphasise popular participation and create of an ’enabling
environment’ designed to allow local participation to help them to prevent and reverse
desertification.
The National Action Programme and the Process
As a pre-requisite to the whole process, a Country Party in preparing the country National
Action Programme (NAP) should document root causes and extent of the desertification
problem, elaborate programmes and projects, the inputs, and actions required for the way
forward.
The Zambian Government with the financial assistance from UNDP-UNSO and
complying with the requirements of the Convention began to undertake the development of
the NAP in 1996 with the creation of a National Steering Committee to spearhead the
process. The bottom-up and consensus-building approach was adopted. To this effect,
consultative meetings and workshops were carried out in the five provinces of Region I
and II that are severely affected by desertification and drought, namely Central, Eastern,
Lusaka, Southern and Western. The process involved undertaking of stakeholder
inventories and technical studies to document the extent of the problem. These efforts
culminated into the National Forum where elements of the NAP for Zambia were
discussed and agreed upon. The synthesis of the NAP process in Zambia has resulted in the
preparation of the NAP framework document.
ix

--- Page 10 ---
The Zambian NAP will concentrate on five provinces of Regions I and II that experience
severe problems of land degradation and drought. However, as a preventive measure,
programmes aimed at preventing the land degradation problem from spreading should be
proposed in areas not yet severely affected by land degradation and drought.
1.2 Zambia
1.2.1 Country Setting
Location and Physical Environment
Zambia is a land locked country, located near the sub-tropics south of the Equator, and is
surrounded by eight neighbouring countries, namely, Angola, Botswana, Democratic
Republic of Congo, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, Tanzania and Zimbabwe.
The country has a relatively large land surface, with a total area of 752,972 km2 and lies
on the Central Africa high Plateau with an average altitude of 1 200m above sea level.
The Rift valley formations in the eastern and southern parts of the country have produced
escarpment systems and valley troughs. The most famous of the Escarpment systems is
the Muchinga Escarpment.
Zambia’s physical environment owes its attributes to her sub-tropical setting, whose
features are characteristic of both tropical and semi-arid conditions. The country is
divided into three agro-ecological zones of Regions I, II and III. Region I presents semi-
arid conditions and Region III experiences tropical conditions while Region II has
moderation of the two.
Most of the soils of Zambia particularly those in the northern parts of the country are
highly weathered, leached and acidic. This is because of high rainfall in those parts of the
country. In the western part of Zambia, the soils are very strongly to strongly acid, coarse
to fine sandy soils with more than 90% quartz developed over Kalahari sands. The
eastern and south central plateau has moderately leached clayey to loamy soils with
medium to strong acidity. These areas are considered to be the best agricultural soils in
the Country.
Climate is influenced by three main factors: the Inter-Tropical Convergence Zone which
influences the rainfall pattern, occurrence of El Nino which is associated mostly with dry
spells and Altitude, which in the case of Zambia lies on a relatively high elevation and
bestows the country with moderately cool temperatures resulting into a sub-tropical
climate which would probably have been harsh. The country experiences three climatic
distinct seasons namely; the warm rainy (November – April), the cool dry (May – July)
and the hot dry (August – October).
Zambia is well endowed with water resources, both ground and surface water. The major
perennial rivers are the Zambezi, Kafue, Luangwa, Kabompo, Luapula, and Chambeshi.
Other sources of surface water include lakes, swamps and flood areas. The rainfall
x

--- Page 11 ---
Zambia receives replenishes these water bodies. Surface water constitutes 20% of the
Country’s area.
1.2.2 Biological Resources
Zambia has a variety of ecosystems, which give rise to a rich biodiversity in terms of
wildlife, plant, bird and fish species. The Country's vegetation is classified into four major
categories, namely, closed forests, open forests, termitaria and grasslands. Zambian
forests cover 60% of the Country. Zambia has a flora diversity of over 3,000 species with
40% comprising shrubs and wood plants. Of these, 211 species are endemic to Zambia.
The fauna diversity is estimated at 3,631 and it is distributed as follows: - 2032
invertebrates, 409 fish, 67 amphibians, 150 reptiles, 733 birds, 224 mammals and 16
domesticated animals. In addition, there are about 598 species of microorganisms that
have been identified to exist in Zambia. Microorganisms are very important in the
maintenance of ecosystems through nutrient cycling.
1.2.3 Social Economic Environment
Zambia’s economic environment is characterised by heavy dependence on copper mining
for the country's export earnings, government revenue, source of employment and Gross
Domestic Product (GDP). Despite the potentials of other natural resources, the mining
sector, will continue to play a role of driving force in the economic development of the
country.
Unfortunately, the world copper prices have fallen drastically over the years. During the
first and second republics, Zambia implemented socialist policies. This situation led to the
registration of a cash stripped economy. As a result of this, the country has resorted to
heavy borrowing, precipitating a high debt crisis.
Zambia is now one of the highly indebted countries in the world. The poor performance
of the economy has had negative impacts on the development of nearly all sectors, and the
living standards of the people have considerably declined. Zambia today, is recorded as
one of the countries with the lowest GDP per capita of less than US$ 350.
Poverty is widespread and intense in Zambia. More than 70% of the households live
below the poverty datum line. The poverty situation in Zambia intensifies resource
overuse and its degradation.
Zambia’s human population is estimated to be 10.2 million and is growing at 3.1 % per
annum. The current population is expected to double in the next 23 years. The factors
that had contributed to high population growth between 1960 and 1980 prior to the
prevalence of the HIV/AIDS pandemic were high fertility and reduced mortality rates.
The HIV/AIDs pandemic is threatening the survival of many Zambians. The density of
Zambia’s population is estimated at 6 to10 persons per km2. However, the population
xi

--- Page 12 ---
density is higher in many localised areas due to immigration and urbanisation. Zambia is
one of the most urbanised countries in Sub-Saharan Africa.
The poor social economic framework coupled with high population growth rates have had
negative impacts on the status and management of Zambia’s natural resources.
1.3 Environmental Problems
The main environmental problems that affect Zambia today include land degradation, air
pollution especially in mining areas, water pollution and inadequate sanitation, wildlife
depletion and deforestation. These problems when combined lead to biodiversity loss.
2.0. The Desertification Problem in Zambia
The problem of land degradation in Zambia has been caused by Natural, Environmental,
Social, Economic and Land Tenure, as well as, Institutional, Policy and Legal issues have
caused.
2.1.1 Natural, Environmental Factors
Fragile Environment
The location setting of Zambia within the sub-tropics bestows the country with an
environment that is somewhat harsh, fragile and susceptible to land degradation. This is in
terms of slopes particularly, in escarpments or hilly areas, soils, climate and water
availability.
Soils and landscapes
About 80% of the country has low erosion hazard but there are many localised areas
where the problem of land degradation has been or could be severe.
Climatic Conditions
The variability of the rain pattern in Zambia is according to a province. The Average
annual potential evapo-transpiration ranges from 1 394 to 1 892 while the country average
is 1574. This means that some parts of the country are in precipitation deficit. This
situation has implications on water availability, and calls for sustainable management of
water resources.
Drought
The effect of variable climatic factors of El Nino, poor precipitation, high temperatures
and excess evapo-transpiration has in a number of years culminated into drought periods.
xii

--- Page 13 ---
Water Availability
It is noted that Zambia is highly endowed with water resources both ground and surface
water. However, some of the areas in the country experience severe water shortage. This
is due to the climatic variations in the nature of hydrogeology, poor ground water
recharge due to siltation and sedimentation and over pumping through use of bore holes.
In some areas particularly in the valley areas, the underlying rock is saline such that the
water quality from ground supply sources is no longer useful for both domestic and
irrigation purposes. Problems of availability of good quality water supply are critical
particularly in the dry months in some areas. These phenomena also affect the
hydrological processes and water regimes.
Ecosystem Resilience
Zambia has a huge diversity of biological resources and ecosystems. Ecosystem
complexity is a function of climatic elements including rainfall, temperature, evapo-
transpiration, hours of sunshine and total solar radiation.
2.1.2 Social Economic Factors
Poverty, land tenure, property rights, encroachment, new settlements and non-usage of
indigenous knowledge and technologies have been identified as some of the social
economic factors that cause land degradation in Zambia.
Agriculture is the mainstay for the majority of households in Zambia. Small-scale (mostly
poor) farmers represent 79% of the farming community, while large-scale farmers are
estimated at 1% of the total farming population. The emergent/medium scale farmers
constitute 20% of the farming population.
Unsustainable practices of agriculture lead to land degradation in Zambia. Examples of
such practices include shifting cultivation, monoculture cultivation, use of heavy
machinery for cultivation, use of inorganic fertilisers, over-grazing, cultivation of wetland
areas and cultivation on unstable landscapes.
Wood fuel and charcoal consumption does contribute to deforestation and eventually land
degradation. Charcoal production also produces green house gases during carbonisation in
the earth kilns.
Indiscriminate late bush fires have been observed to reduce wood annual increment by
50% in miombo woodland. In woodland areas, trees less than 3m high are generally
susceptible to destruction when burnt and late fires destroy 84% of the herbage biomass.
2.1.3 Institutional and Legal Issues
The Government has since the 1980s instituted a number of important institutional, policy
and legal reforms, which could advance effective environmental management. However,
xiii

--- Page 14 ---
some of these are still underway like the decentralisation policy, which should ensure
better involvement of the local populations and the civil society in all development
activities.
There exist various Acts, which address issues of environmental management including
land. Some of these Acts have efforts that are scattered, sectoral or out of date, and often
not known by the general public.
Zambia does not have specific policy on desertification and drought. It is important to
develop such a policy in order to address the problem of land degradation. In addition,
Zambia has not incorporated the UNCCD in her law despite ratifying the Convention in
1996.
2.2 Manifestations and Effects of the Land Degradation Problem
The effects of land degradation are multiple. These include loss of environmental
benefits, such as, shelter, shade, visual amenities; and productivity of the land to support
natural veld, livestock and crop production. At global level, the land degradation problem
has negative implications on the hydrological cycle in particular on flood occurrence,
drying-up of streams, poor ground water recharge systems due to high run-off rates and
siltation and sedimentation of rivers. Deforestation reduces the carbon dioxide sink and
this can lead to the destabilisation of the climate.
The low productivity of the land caused by land degradation causes low crop yields, poor
animal productivity and animal diseases. Noting that the human population in Zambia is
dependent on agriculture, these factors undermine social economic development, and
continue to deepen the poverty crisis.
3.0 Relationship between NAP and other Programmes: An Analysis
Zambia has for sometime developed multi-sectoral and sectoral programmes relating to the
NAP. These show some adequacy between the orientations, strategies of various policies,
nature of constraints to be removed and the potentialities exploited. These areas form
avenues for NAP interventions and collaboration.
4.0 Programme Areas
4.1 Programme Vision
To restore land productivity by using sustainable means of conserving it in order to reduce
poverty and foster sustainable development.
4.2 Programme Purpose
The purpose of NAP is to identify the factors contributing to desertification and put in place
practical measures necessary to combat desertification and mitigate the effects of drought.
xiv

--- Page 15 ---
4.3 Programme Objectives
The NAP aims at contributing to sustainable environmental management through the
reduction/control of land degradation, thereby contributing to Poverty Reduction, Food
self-sufficiency and Food Security and ultimately contributing to Economic Growth. Its
immediate objectives are:
(cid:1)(cid:2) Reduce the destruction of land resources in affected areas
(cid:1)(cid:2) Promote sustainable use of land resources
(cid:1)(cid:2) Increase public awareness and information dissemination on matters of land
degradation
(cid:1)(cid:2) Provide a suitable policy and legislative framework for the implementation of NAP
(cid:1)(cid:2) Establish and support effective administrative and co-ordination of the NAP
(cid:1)(cid:2) Introduce and improve on assessments, planning and monitoring systems for the
effective management of NAP, and
(cid:1)(cid:2) Establish partnerships with multi-lateral and bilateral institutions in the management of
arid areas.
4.4 Identified Programme Areas of Intervention
To achieve the stated objectives, the following programme areas have been proposed
according to their priority:
(cid:1)(cid:2) Early Warning and Preparedness
(cid:1)(cid:2) Forestry, Ecosystems and Species Conservation
(cid:1)(cid:2) Water Catchment and Energy Conservation
(cid:1)(cid:2) Collaboration and Networking
(cid:1)(cid:2) Capacity Building of Programme Co-ordination Unit and Other Focal Persons
(cid:1)(cid:2) Extension, Public Awareness, and Information Dissemination
(cid:1)(cid:2) Land Degradation Assessments, Monitoring and Reporting
(cid:1)(cid:2) Easy to use environmentally friendly technologies including Indigenous Knowledge
(cid:1)(cid:2) Livelihood Improvement
(cid:1)(cid:2) Food Self Sufficiency and Food Security
(cid:1)(cid:2) Human Settlement Management, and
(cid:1)(cid:2) Legal and Policy Reviews
4.5 Logical Framework and Action Plan
An action plan based on the logical framework approach has been prepared. The approach
shows in matrix form, the vision, objectives, outputs, interventions, activities,
performance indicators, means of verification, assumptions, key players and timeframe.
Detailed interventions and Action Plans for each programme is provided in Appendix IV.
A time frame of 5 years is proposed and activities costed, requiring US$ 26.6 million in
total for the whole programme period to implement the NAP. Government, donors,
xv

--- Page 16 ---
NGOs, communities and other groups identified with the NAP, will support the proposed
budget.
5.0 Implementation and Co-ordination Arrangements
Institutional Arrangements
An institutional mechanism for implementation and co-ordination of the NAP is
proposed, involving the establishment of the National Co-ordination Committee on
Desertification, the National Technical Committee on Desertification and Drought,
Programme Management Unit (PMU) and co-ordinating committees at provincial, district
and grassroots levels. The committees to be formed should be on principles of
accountability and transparency. Other institutional measures suggested are ways and
means of ensuring the full participation of all identified stakeholders of the NAP, co-
ordination of NGOs and CBOs participation at national, provincial, district and grassroots
levels through establishment of focal points and community institutions to co-ordinate
and manage the programmes. International co-operation will be co-ordinated by the
Donor Community Facilitator.
Funding Sources and Mechanisms
Funding to implement programmes outlined in the NAP shall be mobilised through the
Global Mechanism (GM), National Desertification Fund (NDF), The Cotonou Agreement
and the Local Area Development Programmes (LADPs).
Conclusion
It should be mentioned that the NAP prepared is an outcome of a consultative process and
is a consensus of all the stakeholders that have been involved in the process. The NAP is
also not a finite step, but a flexible process requiring interactive inputs and revision from
time to time depending on circumstances. This output is not an elaborate project
document, but a framework basis for preparation of detailed projects/programmes on land
degradation for implementation. The NAP is therefore a contribution to the sustainable
management and development of Zambia’s land resources and in particular to combating a
major global problem, land degradation.
xvi

--- Page 17 ---
CHAPTER ONE: BACKGROUND
1.1 The United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification
The United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD) was conceived out
of concern by the international community which recognised that desertification was a
major economic, social and environmental problem to many countries in all regions of the
world. This resulted in convening of the United Nations Conference on Desertification
(PACD) in 1977, which adopted a plan of action for desertification control. Despite
PACD and other efforts made by the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)
which concluded in 1991, the problem of land degradation in arid, semi-arid and dry sub-
humid areas intensified. However, there were local examples of success (UNCCD, 1994).
Today, there are about 250 million people from over 100 countries that are directly
affected by desertification with another one billion at risk. The projected increase in the
world’s population to 10 billion by the year 2050 will further stretch the carrying capacity
of the earth. In addition, the increasing pressure from humans, animals, and climatic
events, in particular recurrent droughts have exacerbated land-degradation processes.
As a result, the question of how to tackle desertification was still a major concern for the
1992 United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) which was
held in Rio de Janeiro in Brazil. This conference recognised that environmental concerns
were inextricably linked to development and that the survival of present and future
generations will depend on the promotion of sustainable development.
In respect to desertification, the conference supported a new integrated approach to
combating the problem through emphasising action to promote sustainable development
at community level. The conference called upon the United Nations General Assembly to
establish an inter governmental committee to prepare by June, 1994 a Convention to
Combat Desertification in those countries experiencing serious drought and /or
desertification, particularly in Africa.
The Convention aims at combating desertification and mitigating the effects of drought in
countries experiencing serious drought and/or desertification, particularly in Africa,
through effective action at all levels, supported by international co-operation and
partnership arrangements, in the framework of an integrated approach which is consistent
with Agenda 21, with a view to contributing to the achievement of sustainable
development in affected areas.
Achieving this objective will involve preparation and adoption of long-term integrated
strategies that focus simultaneously, in affected areas, on improved productivity of land,
and the rehabilitation, conservation of land and water resources, leading to improved
living conditions, especially at community level.
1

--- Page 18 ---
1.1.1 Definitions of Terms
According to the Convention to Combat Desertification the following terms are defined as
follows:
1. ‘Desertification’ means land degradation in arid, semi-arid and dry sub-humid areas
resulting from various factors, including climatic variations and human activities.
2. ’Combating Desertification’ includes activities which are part of the integrated
development of land in arid, semi-arid and dry sub-humid areas for sustainable
development which are aimed at:-
i) prevention and /or reduction of land degradation
ii) rehabilitation of partly degraded land, and
iii) reclamation of desertification land
3. ’Drought’ means the naturally occurring phenomenon that exists when precipitation
has been significantly below normal recorded levels, causing serious hydrological
imbalances that adversely affect the land resource production systems.
4. ’Mitigating the Effects of Drought’ means activities related to the prediction of
drought and intended to reduce the vulnerability of society and natural systems to
drought as it relates to combating desertification.
5. ’Land’ means the terrestrial biophysical system that comprises soil, vegetation, other
biota and the ecological and hydrological processes that operate within the system.
6. ’Land Degradation’ means reduction or loss, in arid, semi-arid and dry sub-humid
areas, of the biological or economic productivity and complexity of rainfed crop land,
irrigated cropland, or range, pasture, forest and woodlands resulting from land-uses or
from a process or combination of processes, including processes arising from human
activities and habitation patterns, such as:
i) Soil erosion caused by wind and/or water,
ii) Deterioration of the physical, chemical and biological or economic properties of
soil, and
iii) Long term loss of natural vegetation.
7. ’Arid, Semi-Arid and Dry Sub-humid Areas’ means areas, other than polar and sub-
polar regions, in which the ratio of annual precipitation to potential evapotranspiration
falls within the range from 0.05 to 0.65
8. ’Affected Areas’ means arid, semi-arid and/or dry sub-humid areas affected or
threatened by desertification
9. ’Affected Countries’ means countries whose lands include, in whole or in part,
affected areas.
2

--- Page 19 ---
1.1.2 Ratification of the UNCCD
The UNCCD was initiated in 1994 and it came into force in 1996. Zambia signed and
ratified the Convention in 1994 and 1996 respectively.
Zambia is also a party to some environmental conventions that have a bearing on matters
of land degradation. These are reflected in Appendix I.
1.1.3 The National Action Programme and the Process
To address the land degradation problems affecting the Country, Zambia has decided to
come up with a National Action Programme (NAP). This is in line with the UNCCD
objectives under Articles 2, 9 and 10 where the formulation and implementation of
National Action Programmes forms the core to the implementation of the treaty. All
affected parties are obliged to prepare, publicise and implement them as ‘the central
element’ in their strategies. They are to be closely inter-linked to development policies
and are to be updated through a continuing participatory process on the basis of lessons
learnt from the field action and from the results of research.
According to the NAP process, it should provide a framework to incorporate long-term
strategies to combat desertification and mitigate the effects of drought with national
policies for sustainable development. Taking into account the causal factors and specific
requirements of a particular affected country party, the NAPs shall include, as a
requirement, and as appropriate, some or all of the following long term measures to
combat desertification and mitigate the effects of drought. These measures have been
outlined in Box 1.
Box 1: Long Term Measures to be included in NAPs
(cid:1)(cid:2) Promote alternative livelihoods and improvement of economic environments with a
view to strengthening programmes aimed at the eradication of poverty and at ensuring
food security;
(cid:1)(cid:2) Promote development of sustainable water harvesting programmes for irrigation of
crops and livestock;
(cid:1)(cid:2) Management or control of population dynamics;
(cid:1)(cid:2) Promotion of sustainable management of natural resources and agricultural practices;
(cid:1)(cid:2) Development and efficient use of various energy sources;
(cid:1)(cid:2) Strengthen institutional and legal framework;
(cid:1)(cid:2) Promote and develop co-operation and co-ordination, in the spirit of partnership,
between the donor community, government at all levels, NGOs, local populations and
community groups, and facilitate access by local populations to appropriate
information and technology;
(cid:1)(cid:2) Strengthening of capabilities for assessment and systematic observation including
climatological, hydrological and meteorological service;
3

--- Page 20 ---
(cid:1)(cid:2) Strengthening of drought preparedness and management, including drought
contingency plans;
(cid:1)(cid:2) Strengthening of capacities, education and public awareness
The Zambian NAP detailed in this report was formulated along the above guidelines
through a consultative process, which started in 1996. It was co-ordinated by the UNCCD
National Focal Point housed in the Ministry of Tourism, Environment and Natural
Resources. This process is detailed in Box 2.
Box 2 : The NAP Process
(cid:1)(cid:2) National Steering Committee (NSC) meetings. The Committee, chaired by the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of
Tourism, Environment and Natural Resources (MTENR) is composed of 21 representatives of key government
ministries, one NGO, private sector and a Quasi-Government institution. The Committee provided policy and
technical guidance to the NAP process. A number of meetings have been held to this effect.
(cid:1)(cid:2) Provincial Meetings were held in 1998 in five provinces of regions I and II that are severely affected by
desertification. Stakeholders, traditional rulers and local government authorities were represented. The aim of the
meetings was to obtain information on desertification issues in the province and propose actions for combating
desertification and mitigating the effects of drought.
(cid:1)(cid:2) National NGOs Forum: Most NGOs and CBOs representatives, community representatives, government
representatives, representatives of women groups and the private sector attended this Forum. The aim of this
workshop was to select an NGO Focal Point institution, identify problems of NGOs/CBOs in execution of
desertification programmes and identify areas of NGOs/CBOs involvement.
(cid:1)(cid:2) National Forum: This was attended by all identified key stake-holders from government departments, NGOs,
CBOs, donor community, quasi-government institutions, private sector representatives, Research Institutions and
the University of Zambia. The aim of the workshop was to deliberate and synthesise the issues from provinces
and identify, propose and formulate action programmes to combat desertification.
(cid:1)(cid:2) Technical consultancy reports to provide background information to the NAP Process. The reports include the
following:
(cid:3)(cid:2) An inventory of non-governmental organisations working in the environment and natural resources
management sector
(cid:3)(cid:2) NGOs Needs Assessment Programme Report
(cid:3)(cid:2) The Role of Traditional Institutions in the implementation of the Convention to Combat Desertification in
Zambia
(cid:3)(cid:2) An inventory of key stake-holders to the National Action Programme for the implementation of the UNCCD
in Zambia
(cid:3)(cid:2) An ECA Mission Report on the implementation of the UNCCD in Zambia
(cid:3)(cid:2) The role and capacity of NGOs and CBOs in the management of environment in Zambia
In addition, working papers were also presented at the various workshops/meetings on the following topics:
(cid:1)(cid:2) Rainfall patterns and drought in Zambia
(cid:1)(cid:2) Gender and desertification in Zambia
(cid:1)(cid:2) Social economic issues of desertification
(cid:1)(cid:2) Land-tenure and property rights in Zambia
(cid:1)(cid:2) The Role of NGOs/CBOs in the implementation of the CCD
(cid:1)(cid:2) The effects of desertification on local communities
(cid:1)(cid:2) Sustainable land and natural resources management in Zambia
(cid:1)(cid:2) Role of women in combating desertification in Zambia.
(cid:1)(cid:2) Drafting of the NAP framework document, which output constitutes this report. A Consultant was engaged to
draft the NAP Framework Document.
Data gaps identified in the above were supplemented by literature reviews, interviews with key stakeholders and informants
at the national level.
4

--- Page 21 ---
1.1.4 Guiding Principles
To prepare and implement the NAP according to the Convention, the following guiding
principles have been agreed. The NAP shall:
(cid:1)(cid:2) Ensure and facilitate the participation of concerned stake-holders and enhance
partnership building and promote community participation;
(cid:1)(cid:2) Build on past experiences;
(cid:1)(cid:2) Contribute to furthering current sustainable development efforts and plans;
(cid:1)(cid:2) Strengthen national and local capacities; and
(cid:1)(cid:2) Establish mechanisms for follow-up and co-ordination, systematic monitoring and
evaluation.
The NAP process should contribute to the following along with the above:
(cid:1)(cid:2) Formulating and promoting the implementation of programmes based on priorities
identified through a consultative process;
(cid:1)(cid:2) Identifying all possible financing windows to ensure funding and consolidating the
relevant on-going programmes;
(cid:1)(cid:2) Providing better synergy and coherence between the various programmes at local and
national levels and thus providing a framework for harmonisation of policies and
improvement at local and national levels. It enhances international co-operation and
co-ordination;
(cid:1)(cid:2) Facilitating exchange of information, experiences and know-how amongst stake-
holders;
(cid:1)(cid:2) Rationalising and strengthening activities of national organisations dealing with
desertification and drought to ensure more coherence and avoid duplication; and
(cid:1)(cid:2) Ensuring economies of scale in the implementation.
The approach in preparing and implementing the NAP shall take into consideration
community participation and gender.
1.1.5 The NAP Area and Scope
The NAP Document shall concentrate on five provinces of Regions I and II that
experience severe problems of land degradation and drought. These provinces are Central,
Eastern, Lusaka, Southern and Western Provinces. However, to prevent the problem of
land degradation from spreading, there is need to promote the proposed action
programmes in areas not yet severely affected by land degradation as a preventive
measure.
5

--- Page 22 ---
1.2 ZAMBIA
1.2.1 Country Setting
Location
Zambia is a sub-tropical Country located between latitudes 8o and 18o South of the
Equator and between longitude 22o and 34o East. The country is landlocked. It is
surrounded by eight countries namely, Angola, Botswana, Democratic Republic of
Congo, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, Tanzania and Zimbabwe ( Figure 1 ).
6

--- Page 23 ---
7

--- Page 24 ---
Physical Environment
Land Systems
Zambia has a total land surface area of 752,972 km2 with an average altitude of 1,200m
above sea level. The altitude varies with highest parts in the northeast (1,500m - 2,000m
above sea level), and the lowest parts in the south (350m – 600m above sea level) which
is at the confluence of the Zambezi and Luangwa Rivers in Luangwa District.
The eastern and southern parts of the country are characterised by deep rift valley
systems, which form part of the East African Rift Valley. The valley troughs are relatively
flat but have hilly escarpments. The rift valley system comprises the Luangwa and the
middle Zambezi valley. The predominant escarpment system is the Muchinga.
Agro-ecological Zones
Zambia is divided into three agro-ecological zones of Regions I, II and III (Figure 2). The
various characteristics for each of the regions are described in Box 3.
Box 3: Agro-ecological Zones in Zambia
Region I. This covers the eastern and southern rift valley areas. It also includes
the southern parts of Western and Southern Provinces. It is characterised by
hottest and driest climatic conditions, with rainfall of less than 800mm per
annum and is categorised as semi-arid. It has a short growing period (season) of
between 80 and 120 days. The rainfall is highly variable and unreliable within
one rainy season, and between the years; putting predicament on agricultural
development. The rainfall intensities in this region are very high. These can
induce the process of soil erosion if the land is devoid of vegetation through
erosivity. The steep slopes along the escarpments have high erosion risk.
Region II. This region covers the sandveld plateau zone of Central, Eastern,
Lusaka and Southern Provinces. The region is a medium rainfall zone with 800-
1200mm per season, and has a growing season of 120-150 days. This is the
most productive zone in the country. However, use of machinery, prolonged crop
production over a period of time on the same portions of land and continuous
application of chemical fertilisers have generally affected the natural soil
qualities, and the soils are degraded.
Region III. This is part of the central African plateau covering Northern,
Luapula, Copper-belt and North Western Provinces, as well as parts of Serenje
and Mkushi Districts. The region is a high rainfall area of 1,200mm and above
and has a growing season of up to 190 days. The high rainfall has resulted in
considerable leaching and the soils are highly acidic, limiting the range of crops
that can be grown in this region, especially if special farming practices are not
employed.
8

--- Page 25 ---
senoZ
lacigoloce-orgA
s’aibmaZ
.2
erugiF
9

--- Page 26 ---
Soils
In general, the soils that have developed on the plateau region of northern and north-
western parts of the country in agro-ecological Region III are the strongly weathered,
highly leached and very strongly acid clayey to loamy soils. The eastern and south
central plateau has moderately leached clayey to loamy soils with medium to strong
acidity. These soils are found in agro-ecological Region IIa. In the western part of the
country the soils are very strongly to strongly acid, coarse to fine sandy soils with more
than 90% quartz developed over Kalahari sands. This constitutes agro-ecological region
IIb. The soils of the escarpment zone are shallow, coarse to fine loam. The valley trough
has loamy to clayey soils. The last two geomorphic units constitute agro-ecological
region I. The sandy to heavy clay water logged soils are found in the floodplains and
dambos.
Climate
The climate of Zambia is influenced by the three main factors: the Inter-tropical
Convergence Zone (ITCZ), Altitude and El Nino. ITCZ is an area where two air masses
from the northern and southern hemisphere meet, producing an active convective area,
that in turn causes rainfall. It’s movement north to south and back to the north in each rain
season causes moist Congo air to prevail for a longer period to the northern parts of the
Country than to the southern parts half of the country where dry south-easterly air flow is
predominant at the start and end of the seasons. Hence the northern receives more rains
than the southern. Altitude causes low temperatures in the broad belt plateau country,
from what would otherwise be harsh tropical climate. El Nino is the warming of sea
surface temperature in the Pacific Ocean in certain years causing wet and dry conditions
in some parts of the Globe. In Zambia most El Nino events have been associated with
drought.
Zambia is characterised by three distinct seasons: the warm rainy season (November to
April), the cool dry season (May to July) and the hot dry season (August to October). The
Country experiences temperatures ranging from 16oC to 27oC in the cool-dry season and
from 27oC to 38oC in the hot dry and warm rainy seasons. The high altitude areas
experience cooler temperatures than the low-lying regions.
Zambia receives an annual average rainfall of about 1,000mm countrywide. Rainfall
varies on average from 1,400mm in the north and to 600mm in the south.
Water Resources
Zambia is well endowed with surface and ground water resources. The major perennial
rivers constituting surface water include the Zambezi, Luangwa, Kafue, Kabompo,
Luapula and Chambeshi. The major lakes of Zambia are Bangweulu, Kariba, Tanganyika
and Mweru.
10

--- Page 27 ---
Surface water from these rivers cover about 6% of the Country (ZFAP, 1997). If all the
wetlands are included, surface water covers 20% of Zambia’s surface (Chabwela, et al,
1994). See Figure 3.
The water bodies also constitute wetlands areas of Zambia such as Kafue Flats,
Bangweulu Flats, Zambezi FloodPlain and Luangwa Valley Flood Plain. Some of these
wetland areas are listed as wetlands of international importance under the Ramsar
Convention.
Figure 3. Major Rivers of Zambia
Chambeshi re v Ri
R
vier
izebmaZ
Luangwa
River
rev
Ri
eufaK
Zam
b zi e
River
Kafue River
11
L u a
N
LLaakkee TTaannggaannyyiikkaa
LLaakkee MMwweerruu
W E
S
pu
v R i al LLaakkee BBaannggwweeuulluu re
Rivers
International Boundaries
Lakes
LLaakkee KKaarriibbaa
300 0 300 600Kilometers

--- Page 28 ---
1.2.2 Biological Resources
Ecosystems
Zambia’s sub-tropical setting places her within the Zambezian Regional Centre of
Endemism that extends from Katanga in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
Transvaal in South Africa, representing characteristic features of both semi-arid and
tropical environments.
Vegetation
Forests cover 60% of the country. The country's vegetation is classified into four major
categories (Storrs, 1995). These are Closed Forests, Open Forests, Terminaria and Grass
Lands. Table 1 below gives the extent of these vegetation types.
Table 1. Vegetation Types of Zambia
Vegetation Type Area, 1000 ha Proportion - %
1. Closed Forests
Parinari 420 0.06
Marquesia 430 0.06
Lake Basin 15,560 2.07
Cryptoseplum 15,210 2.00
Baikiaea 6,830 0.91
Itigi 1,900 0.25
Montane 40 0.01
Swamp 1,530 0.20
Riparian 810 0.11
2. Woodland (Open Forest)
Miombo 311,460 41.41
Kalahari 85,460 11.36
Mopane 38,700 5.15
Munga 32,600 4.34
Termitaria 24,260 3.23
3. Grassland 206,350 27.44
4. Open Water 10,500 1.40
TOTAL 752,060 100.00
Source: GRZ, 1998
12

--- Page 29 ---
The closed forests are limited in extent, covering only about 6% of the country. The
Cryptosepalum evergreen forests are the most extensive and occur in the western part of
the country while the Baikiaea forests found in the south west parts of the country are the
second most extensive forests characterised by the commercially valuable indigenous tree
species known as baikiaea Plurijuga (State of the Environment in Zambia, 2000: pp.).
The open forests or woodlands known as Savannah woodlands are the dominant
vegetation type in Zambia covering 66 % of the land. There are four types of these
woodlands of which the most extensive being the Miombo woodlands that covers about
42% of the country characterised by the Brachystegia, Julbernadia and Isoberlinia
species. This is followed by the Kalahari woodlands, Mopane, Munga and Termitaria
(Ibid).
Termitaria or anthill vegetation covers about 3.23 % and is present in all regions of the
country except in areas of pure sand. This vegetation type is classified according to its
association with other vegetation types; hence the classification; Miombo Termitaria,
Kalahari Termitaria, Mopane Termitaria, Munga Termitaria, Riparian Termitaria and
Glassland Termitaria (Ibid).
Grasslands cover 27% of the land area in Zambia and ranges from pure grasslands to
grasslands with scattered trees. They occur in poorly drained dambos, flood plains or
swamps (Ibid).
Open
Water
1% Closed Closed Forests
Forests
Grassland
6% Woodland (Open
27%
Forest)
Grassland
Woodland
(Open
Open Water
Forest)
66%
Figure 4: Vegetation Types of Zambia
13

--- Page 30 ---
Zambia has an estimated floristic diversity of over 3,774 species, 40% comprising shrubs
and woody plants. 211 of these species are endemic to Zambia (MENR,1999).
Values and Uses of Forests
Forest resources have an immense value to the Zambian society and provide valuable
environmental services that ensure the continuation of ecological processes that maintain
biodiversity. Forests maintain the ecological balance through maintenance of water and
nutrient cycles, control of soil erosion and land degradation and regulating climatic
parameters such as temperature, rainfall, just to mention but a few. Forests support
livelihood systems through provision of plant food fruits, stems, tubers, leaves as well as,
flowers and animal proteins for invertebrates, fish, birds and mammals. Plants are also
directly used for treatment of diseases as medicine. They are also exploited for
commercial gain at household, community and national levels.
Fauna
Zambia is blessed with a wide and rich diversity of ecosystems including vast areas of
wetlands. These form a home to a wide variety of fauna species. Among these species,
fish and mammals are the most valuable, making Zambia an important destination for
tourism in Africa. They are also an important source of protein for the majority of the
people in Zambia. The Black Lechwe, which thrives in swampy areas, is known to exist
only in Zambia.
The fauna diversity is estimated at 3,631 and distributed as follows: 2032 invertebrates
(27+ endemic), 409 fish (204 endemic), 67 amphibians (1 endemic), 150 reptiles, 733
birds (76 rare or endangered), 224 mammals (28 rare or endangered) and 16 domesticated
animals (MENR, 1999). Under the wildlife statutes, 28 mammals, 36 birds and 4 reptiles
are under protection. The list of protected species has however not been reviewed for
some time now.
Protected areas have been established because of the diversity of habitats and the
associated flora and fauna that has regional and international importance. Zambia has a
very good network of protected area systems comprising 19 national parks, which cover
8% of the country and 34 game management areas covering 22% of the country. An
additional 10% of the land is protected forest area, making a combined 40% of the land in
Zambia under protection. The protected areas network also includes bird sanctuaries,
game ranches, botanical reserves and national heritage sites.
Through sustainable management practices, wildlife (including fish) resources contribute
significantly to local and national economies through revenue generation and sustainable
supply of protein food for a variety of species that are abundant.
14

--- Page 31 ---
Micro-organisms
There are about 598 species of micro-organisms that have been identified to exist in
Zambia. These consist of 12 species of bacteria, 446 of fungi, 4 of protozoa and 35 of
viruses (MENR, 1999). The distribution of microorganisms is generally affected by
rainfall and soil moisture content. Habitats with high rainfall have a higher variability of
species and greater numbers of individuals per species.
Detailed information on distribution and abundance of microorganisms in different
ecosystems is not readily available. There is need, therefore, to do bio-prospecting
research on microorganisms, as recent scientific work has revealed the importance of the
use of some of these organisms in modern medicine.
Microorganisms are also very important in the maintenance of the ecosystems through
nutrient cycling. More effort is, therefore, needed to manage the habitats and moisture in
the soils effectively for purposes of conserving microorganisms to meet the above uses.
This is more crucial in the dry-land areas where rainfall is limited, vegetation is sparse
and therefore biological activity is inhibited to promote the breakdown of organic matter
and thereby releasing nutrients in the soil.
1.2.3 Social Economic Environment
Zambia’s Economy
Zambia’s economy is dependent on copper mining, which earns about 95% of the
country's export earnings, contributing 45% of government revenue and is a major source
of formal employment and Gross Domestic Product (Imboela, 1996; after DHS 1992).
From independence to 1974, the economic performance was very impressive and
experienced a boom in terms of foreign exchange reserves due to good copper prices on
the international market.
The Zambian economic environment started deteriorating when the copper prices began
to fall as from the mid 1970s, while the prices for oil rose. This entailed high oil import
bills. During this period Zambia's exports also declined. This resulted in the depletion of
the country's foreign reserves.
From independence to the 1990's, Zambia adopted socialist economic policies that were
characterised by public sector domination in which government had overall control.
The economy was built on an extensive administrative control system following
commandist socialist policies, which were characterised by nationalisation of most
economic activities, import substitution in the industrialisation process and the use of
price controls and subsidies. To meet its social obligations, Zambia has had to borrow
heavily and is today one of the highly indebted countries in the world.
15

--- Page 32 ---
Economic Reforms
In recognition of these problems, government since the 1980s began to implement a series
of structural economic reforms, supported by the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the
World Bank and other bilateral and multilateral agencies to try to reverse the trend in
economic performance.
Currently, the government is implementing the ambitious New Economic Reform
Programme (NERP) under the Structural Adjustment Programme. The programme aims at
stabilising the economy in order to lay a foundation for economic sustainable growth and
development. This programme focuses on the liberalisation of the economy and the
privatisation of commercial undertakings. It also entails reformation of economic
institutions and the implementation of the public sector reform programme with a view of
improving efficiency and management. Dependence on the state has been reduced through
promotion of private initiatives among the people. The programme has removed subsidies
and the promotion of competition and market led activities. The government has
promoted cash budget measures to scale down on expenditure.
The impact of the reforms has yet to produce positive results at the micro-economic level.
The reforms have been associated with the collapse of formal employment, reduced real
incomes and widespread poverty.
Social Environment
Poverty
It should be mentioned that the economic pressures facing Zambia puts her as one of the
poorest states in the world. Poverty is widespread and intense in Zambia, as illustrated by
the CSO’s Living Conditions Monitoring Survey Report of 1996 and 1998. Measured in
terms of real household incomes, expenditures, asset ownership, nutritional status, disease
incidence and access to quality social support service and amenities, the reports show high
incidence of poverty. 68% of the households were living below the poverty datum line in
1991, and this rose to 78% in 1996. It slightly declined to 73% in 1998.
The incidence of poverty according to the 1998 survey is higher in Zambia’s rural and
peri-urban areas (83%) like Western Province, than urban areas 56% (CSO, 1998). In
terms of various strata, poverty is more serious among the most disadvantaged groups of
society, namely the subsistence farmers, unemployed, women, children and the disabled.
There is a high correlation between poverty and environmental degradation as a result of
poor people’s dependence on exploitation of the environment for survival (UNDP’s
Zambia Human Development Report, 1998). The poverty situation in Zambia intensifies
resource overuse and its degradation.
16

--- Page 33 ---
Increased unemployment has forced a lot of people to be engaged in informal sector
activities as a coping strategy, mainly involving natural resource products in rural urban
trade and unregulated or unsustainable forms of exploitation (Mupimpila, et al, 1998).
These informal sector activities include agriculture (semi-shifting cultivation), harvesting
of trees for firewood and for charcoal, logging of timber, gathering of plant materials for
various uses, illegal commercial hunting and unregulated fishing. These activities if
unchecked result into the degradation of the natural resources base.
In dryland areas, which are generally marginal and sensitive, heavy exploitation of natural
resources to meet food needs, as a result of food shortages, would induce and enhance
land degradation and impairing of the ecosystems.
Human Population
Composition of the Population
Zambia’s population has grown rapidly over the years. Zambia’s population enumerated at
4.1 million in 1969 grew to 5.7 million in 1980 and 7.4 million in 1990. In 2001, it was
estimated to have grown to 10.2 million. The estimated population growth rate was 3.1%
which is one of the highest in the world, implying approximately a 23 year doubling time
of the population (UNDP, 1998). The structure of the population is characterised by a
high proportion of youths 51%, under 16 years old. This indicates high dependency ratio.
There are clear indications of considerable momentum for future population growth. This
growth of the population is due to mainly high fertility rates, calculated at 6.7 children per
woman and reduced mortality rates. These fertility rates are considered as one of the
highest in Africa. Fertility rates are even higher in rural areas (7.0 children per woman) as
compared to urban areas (6.3 children per woman). This is due to lower levels of literacy
and contraceptive use in the former. High fertility rates complimented by lowered
mortality rates between the 1960s and 1980s, led to the rapid increase in the Zambian
population.
The mortality rate has begun to rise in the recent years due to the deterioration in living
standards of many Zambians and the prevalence of the Human Immuno-Deficiency Virus/
Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (HIV/AIDS).
Most of the population is dependent on natural resources for survival. This has serious
implications on the country’s physical environment. The government capacity to provide
adequate services to its people and effectively manage natural resources is hindered by its
constrained treasury.
According to 1990 census, the Zambian population is characterised by high proportion of
females as compared to males. Out of every 100 females, 96.1 were males. As regards to
households, 24% were female headed and 35% of these were in rural areas.
17

--- Page 34 ---
Females have special cultural problems as a result of their gender, for example, limited
access to productive resources, poverty and heavily constrained with household chores,
this distribution of population entails serious social economic problems with the Zambian
female-headed households.
The increasing human population pressure on the resources, coupled with the competitive
open access harvesting for day to day subsistence, have resulted into the cumulative
demand pressures on the resources arising from commercial activities including those of
the poor.
Population Density
Zambia’s population density was estimated at 13.5 persons per km2 in 1998. The density
varies considerably between areas and some locations have over 100 persons per km2.
There are a number of factors that have influenced population distribution and settlement
patterns. These include availability of agricultural land. Kay (1971) points out that there is
a close relationship between population distribution and soil types. This means that those
parts of the country which have good agricultural soils, like Southern, Eastern and Central
Provinces have high population concentrations, as people particularly in rural areas
depend on agriculture.
Other factors include displacements, for example, construction of the Kariba Dam, which
resulted in the displacement of the Gwembe Tonga from the valley to Lusitu area. This
resulted in the concentration of people in areas like Lusitu (Siavonga) which are now
heavily populated and severely degraded due to high population pressure and
overgrazing beyond the area’s carrying capacity.
Availability of water is another factor, which affect population distribution. People settle
along perennial streams or major rivers, around swamps, lakes or big dambos for water
supply, agriculture (including livestock) and fishing.
The other factor is tsetsefly distribution. Areas infested with tsetseflies are sparsely
inhabited due to the prevalence of trypanosomosis, which affect both livestock and
humans.
Migration and urbanisation influences population density or distribution. In Zambia,
most rural areas have inadequate employment opportunities and social amenities. These
aspects are closely associated with urban areas. Other benefits associated with urban
areas are that they serve as service centres, which all factors combined trigger rural-
urban migration in Zambia. This makes Zambia one of the most urbanised countries in
Southern Africa. The outstanding problem resulting from the rural-urban influx has been
the uncontrolled growth of squatter compounds in urban areas. The governments, both
past and present, have had difficulties in providing housing and social services in these
areas, especially given the economic decline Zambia is experiencing.
18

--- Page 35 ---
These social economic factors, coupled with increasing human population growth that
exert demand on the declining government revenue base, reinforce the many
disadvantages that exist in the Zambian Society. These have implications on land
degradation.
Its worth noting that overcrowding in some areas of Zambia poses a threat to the
environment. The increasing population growth rate and the existence of localised
pockets and islands of densely populated areas entails over- exploitation of natural
resources. This is evident from the standpoint of over- exploitation and the rates of
deforestation, which correlate very closely with population densities. The threat is posed
by wood-fuel demand (charcoal) and poor agricultural practices which contribute to
deforestation and the problem of solid waste disposal and pollution, which when
combined can result into land degradation and biodiversity loss.
1.3 ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS
The main environmental problems that affect Zambia today include air pollution in
mining areas, deforestation, water pollution and inadequate sanitation, wildlife depletion
and land degradation which when combined have led to biodiversity loss.
Biodiversity loss
The existence of every life form is dependent on the survival of the other forms of life
including human life. The activities of over-exploitation appear to alter this balance and
an increasing number of species are lost each day on earth, posing a serious threat to the
existence of life. In Zambia, depletion of wildlife, fish resources and plant species
resulting from illegal hunting, over exploitation and habitat destruction is a serious
problem.
Agriculture, Land-use Pressures, Deforestation, and the resultant Desertification
The majority of the people depend on agriculture, forests and other natural resources for
their survival. However, the practices employed to enhance production or extraction are
detrimental to the natural resource base, resulting into land degradation. Unless
sustainable land management systems are practised, land degradation will continue,
posing a threat to biodiversity by causing imbalances in ecological processes and
shortage of fresh water. Land degradation also has far-reaching implications like
widespread poverty, significant disruptions in social economic systems, migrations and
loss in land productivity.
Other issues
Other issues include growing amount of wastes and air pollution. In Zambia, there is
increasing use of biomass energy, which increase carbon emissions and eventually
contribute to global warming. This in turn has effects on life.
19

--- Page 36 ---
Air pollution is as a result of dust pollution from huge mine tailing dumps and sulphur
dioxide emissions from mining operations in urban areas. Furthermore, increase in
human population exerts pressure on resources and increases generation of waste matter.
1.4 STATUS OF DESERTIFICATION
The problem of desertification and drought occurs throughout the country but it is more
severe in the southern half of the Country comprising Regions I and II that covers the
Central, Eastern, Lusaka, Southern and Western Provinces (Figure 5).
A summary of problems associated with desertification and drought in the five
mentioned provinces as cited in the consultative workshops held in 1998 on the
UNCCD-NAP are as follows:
Lusaka Province
In Lusaka Province, desertification has caused the following problems: food insecurity,
scarce energy resources, inadequate water supplies and adverse climatic conditions. The
causes of food insecurity were identified among others as low yields, poor marketing
and storage facilities. Scarce energy sources were as a result of deforestation and non-
availability of energy alternatives. Droughts, lowered water tables and poor water
management caused inadequate water supplies. Adverse climatic conditions were
identified as being a result of deforestation and frequent droughts.
Central Province
In Central Province, major desertification problems included the following: reduced
agricultural yields, reduced rainfall due to prolonged dry spells during the rainy season,
reduced plant and animal productivity, low ground water supply, silting of water
courses, salinisation of the soils and reduced quality of rangelands. The causes of these
problems were listed as follows: poor land management practices, inadequate extension
and technical support by relevant extension authorities, deforestation, global weather
changes, increase in population, poverty, accelerated soil erosion, drought, overgrazing
and uncontrolled bush fires.
Eastern Province
In Eastern Province, the following list represents the problems of desertification:
poverty, low ground water levels, reduced soil fertility, soil erosion, and poor crop and
animal productivity. The cause of which included; cultivation along streams and
riverbanks, over-grazing, poor farming methods, population growth and rural-urban
drift, for example, cultivation on hill slopes in Chipata.
20

--- Page 37 ---
Figure 5. Extent of Desertification in Zambia
Southern Province
In Southern Province, the following form the list of desertification problems that were
prevalent, indiscriminate cutting down of trees, soil erosion, inadequate pastoral lands,
windy and dusty conditions, siltation, low water level, low yield and poor road
infrastructure. The causes of which included the following: high energy demand, land
clearing for farming settlements, poor methods of farming, uncontrolled rangeland
management, late burning, intensive and rain storms and bare-land.
Western Province
Desertification problems in Western Province included the following: soil erosion,
deforestation, loss of soil fertility, drought, drying of rivers, aridity, climatic variation,
loss of biodiversity, poor rangeland and sedimentation. The causes of desertification
were listed as follows: uncontrolled cutting down of trees, overstocking, high localised
density population, poor information and communication, poor drainage, poor harvest,
over cultivation and poor pasture management.
21

--- Page 38 ---
CHAPTER TWO: DESERTIFICATION ASSOCIATED PROBLEMS IN ZAMBIA
2.1 ROOT CAUSES OF DESERTIFICATION ASSOCIATED PROBLEM
The desertification problem in Zambia is caused by several factors and has negative
impacts on the people and the environment. Some of the root causes of this problem
include among others Natural, Environmental, Social, Economic and Land Tenure factors,
as well as, Institutional, Policy and Legal issues.
2.1.1 Natural and Environmental Factors
Zambia’s biophysical environment is quite sensitive and fragile, particularly the southern
half of the country in terms of steep slopes (escarpment areas), soils, climate and water
availability.
Geomorphological Systems
Most of Zambia is a plateau, but due to geomorphologic processes that have taken place
over a geological time-scale, this plateau and some hilly areas have been degraded. This
is particularly true for eastern and southern parts of the country, which are covered by
hilly escarpments and complex zones that form parts of the rift valley systems. These
parts of the country have slopes of over 12%. The escarpment system is a very sensitive
zone, in terms of the erosion hazard. Any disturbance to the vegetation cover in these
areas can cause severe land degradation. Even though 80% of the country has no erosion
hazard (NCS, 1985; Chipungu, et al, 1994; Chiti, 1989), there are many localised areas
where the problem of erosion has been severe due to an inter-play of natural factors and
human activities.
Soils
As earlier mentioned in Chapter 1, the Zambian soils are susceptible to erosion.
Climatic Conditions
The provincial average rainfall and rainy days in Zambia provided in Table 2 below,
shows the variability of the rain pattern in the Country. The Annual Rainfall (mm) per
province has been presented in Figure 5.
22

--- Page 39 ---
Table 2: Provincial Average Rainfall and Rainy Days
Province Annual Rainfall, mm Annual Rainy Days
Lusaka 857 77
Copperbelt 1,231 111
Central 947 86
North-Western 1,173 118
Western 808 87
Southern 737 74
Luapula 1,259 123
Northern 1,138 107
Eastern 961 93
Country Average 1,001 97
1400
1200
1000
800
Annual Rainfall (mm)
600
400
200
0
Figure 6: Annual Rainfall (mm) per Province
Due to relatively high temperatures, the average annual potential evapo-transpiration in
Zambia ranges from 1,394mm to 1,892mm while the country average is 1,574mm.
Potential evapo-transpiration is larger than precipitation in Zambia. This means that
Zambia is in a hydrological condition of precipitation deficit that amounts from 100mm
per year to – 1,100mm per year. This situation has implications on water availability and
management in Zambia, particularly in agro-ecological Regions I and II.
Drought Occurrence in Zambia
There has been an observed global change in climate over the past century due to a
combination of natural factors and anthropogenic perturbations to the composition of the
23
lartneC tleb
reppoC
nretsaE alupauL akasuL nrehtroN nretseW-htroN nrehtuoS nretseW
Provinces

--- Page 40 ---
atmosphere, such as volcanic eruptions and emissions of green house gasses associated
with human activities.
As the atmosphere knows no boundaries, climate change has affected Zambia. Some of
the global climate highlights during the period 1994-1998 that have had implications on
Zambia include the following (after Chipeta, 2000):
(cid:1)(cid:2) Floods, droughts and storms continued to inflict massive economic and human
distress around the globe (Australia, China, Europe and U.S.A.). Southern Africa
suffered a severe drought during 1993-1996. There was a large reduction in
agriculture production due to extensive drought in 1994/95;
(cid:1)(cid:2) The change to a Pacific cold episode (La Nina) of the Southern Oscillation Index
during 1995 after five to six years in which warm episode (El Nino) prevailed;
(cid:1)(cid:2) In 1995, the record for average global surface temperature was 0.39oc above the 1961-
1990 normal average temperatures. Recording surface temperatures began in 1860;
(cid:1)(cid:2) The earth global temperature is almost 0.7oc warmer than at the end of the 19th
century.
Zambia’s average climatic conditions have varied within normal range over the years but
the following tendency has been observed in relation to the global climate change (Ibid).
(cid:1)(cid:2) The start of the rainy season over the past 5 years has tended to start in the second
decade (11-20) or third decade (21-30) of November in many areas of the country. In
general, there has been a tendency for late onset of the rainy season since the early
1980s (after Mumba, 1995).
(cid:1)(cid:2) There has been a tendency on average for early withdrawal of the rains since the
1980s. By end of March, the rains would have virtually stopped in most parts of the
country, although a spell of widespread rain may occur in April or sometimes as late
as May.
(cid:1)(cid:2) There is no apparent indication of changes in the trend of total seasonal rainfall over
the country but there have been several rainy seasons that have exhibited mean
seasonal rainfall below normal.
(cid:1)(cid:2) In terms of seasonal rainfall changes, the period from 1972 to 1996 has experienced
the most severe droughts over the whole country. The most affected has been Region
I, which experienced not less than 8 droughts. These droughts have been largely due
to the El Nino phenomenon.
(cid:1)(cid:2) As regards to temperatures, it is shown that since the early 1970s, there has been a
modest warming in the cool season (June, July and August) mean minimum
temperature, whilst considerable warming (by about 1o C) of the mean maximum
temperature has been observed in the hot season (September, October and November)
especially over the northern half of Zambia (Chipeta 2000, after Mamba, 1995).
It should therefore be noted that the effect of variable climatic factors of El Nino, poor
precipitation, high temperatures and excess evapo-transpiration, particularly in the drier
southern region of the country has in a number of years culminated into drought periods.
This exerts stress on primary and agricultural production systems and other human
activities dependent on rainwater. As for primary production, there is a strong correlation
24

--- Page 41 ---
between plant biomass and rainfall, since rainfall influences vegetation production
(WMO, 1997).
The 1967/68 season is said to have marked the beginning of a period of successive dry
years across Africa, including Zambia and wet years have been rare. The effects of
drought have included shortages of drinking water, food shortages, high mortality rate to
both livestock and wild animals, reduced hydro-generated power and shortage of water
transport.
The problem of prolonged drought has linkage and reinforces the problem of
desertification in Zambia.
Proper contingency planning and adequate mechanisms for preparedness should be put in
place to take care of the problem to minimise its impacts. Management and efficient use
of the water resources and promotion of appropriate water harvesting and irrigation
systems are important aspects for mitigating the negative effects of drought. 1
Water Availability
Zambia is endowed with both surface and groundwater resources, though some parts of
the country experience severe water shortages. This is due to human activities which have
tended to induce erosion and sedimentation, in combination with climate variability and
variations in hydrogeology from the northern part of the country to the southern and the
valley regions. There are remarkable differences between the regions in the water regimes
of either underground or streams and rivers. The northern plateau region, which is well
watered, provides the headwaters of most streams and rivers. These rivers are perennial.
The streams that drain the southern and valley parts of the country are, however,
(seasonal) ephemeral, as they only flow after a heavy down pour. Seasonal flush flooding
is a common phenomenon, which given the impermeable sub-surface layers leads to
flooding in the lower valley regions.
Ecosystems Resilience
The ecosystem complexity is a function of climatic elements including rainfall,
temperature, evapo-transpiration, hours of sunshine and total solar radiation.
2.1.2. Social Economic Factors
Poverty
Poverty is a cause as well as a consequence of land degradation in Zambia as outlined in
Chapter 1 under the sub-section discussing Poverty.
1 Appendix II provides a list of episodic events in the climate of Zambia up to date.
25

--- Page 42 ---
Land-Tenure and Property Rights
It is generally argued that a significant cause of environmental degradation lies in
inadequate institutions particularly ill defined property rights.
Property rights can be defined as consisting of bundles of entitlements defining rights and
duties in the use of natural resources, and property rules under which those rights and
duties can be exercised (Hanna & Munasinghe, 1995). There are four types of property
right regimes namely: private, common, state and open access.
In Zambia, land is divided into Customary and State Land. Customary land as defined by
the 1995 Lands Act is land falling under traditional rulers and chiefs and constitute 94%
of the total land area in Zambia. State land is mainly along the line of rail and is owned by
the state. It constitutes 6% of the total land surface area of Zambia.
The 1995 Lands Act abolished the distinction between two types of land but combined
them into customary land under customary tenure. The local residents through chiefs can
obtain title to land. This entails assigning ownership to individuals and guaranteeing to
those owners control of access and to the right of socially acceptable uses. This Act
recognises the traditional systems and the role of traditional leaders in natural resources
management through community participation.
Land Use Practices
Agriculture
Agriculture is the mainstay for the majority of households in Zambia. It provides the bulk
of food and cash requirements. Much of this is dominated by small-scale farmers
representing 79% of the farming community (IFAD, 1993). Current estimates put the total
number of small-scale farmers at 600,000 (MAFF, 1998). Large-scale farmers are
estimated at 1% of the total farming population, while emergent/medium scale farmers
constitute 20% of the farming population. The sustenance of agricultural production and
land productivity at certain levels have meant adoption of farming systems and
technologies by different types of farmers depending on the agro-ecological zone.
Clearing forests for agricultural production is the major cause of deforestation. In
Zambia, it is estimated to account for about 90% of forest clearing. Most of the
agricultural activities such as large-scale agricultural clearing systems, cultivation along
streams or riverbanks and the semi-shifting cultivation prevalent in Zambia have resulted
into detrimental effects on the environment. It has been observed that the cut and burn
semi-shifting cultivation practice in areas where population densities are high and the
poor method of cutting trees is used, slows down the regeneration process.
26

--- Page 43 ---
Wood Fuel and Charcoal Use
Energy resources available in Zambia include wood fuel, electricity, petroleum, coal,
solar and wind. The national energy consumption in 1996 showed that 72% was wood
fuel (firewood and charcoal). It is important to note that out of the total energy resources
available, households consume 68.5%. Wood fuel constitutes the largest resource base. In
the same year it was reported that households consumed 88% of firewood and 96% of
charcoal. Charcoal is used by 85% of urban households for cooking and heating
(Siamwiza, 1999).
The current trend of wood fuel consumption is projected to increase by 79% and the
amount of wood that is converted to charcoal is expected to increase by 119% in the year
2016 (ZFAP, 1998). This demand has implications on the available forest resources. Due
to the high demand and high prices it fetches in urban areas, charcoal is increasingly
becoming an important source of income for the peri-urban people.
The effects of charcoal production as a deforestation factor has been well documented. In
Zambia, one full-time charcoal producer is capable of clearing 0.5 ha per year
(Chidumayo, 1988). With increasing demand and as many people are entering into this
venture as an economic activity, the hectarage cleared per year is indeed great. Due to
this clearance, most of the forests around Lusaka have been deforested, such that the
pattern of charcoal production and supply has shifted from the western and north-western
in the 1970’s and early 1980’s to the Central and Eastern parts of Chongwe District
during the 1990’s (Ibid.).
Charcoal production is done through the kiln method. This method impacts on woodland
regeneration at two levels of intensities: the cut-over area in which most of the trees are
cleared and the kiln spot where regeneration is severely affected due to thermal effects on
plants and soil. Tree regeneration is known to be impaired on kiln spots up to two
decades (Chidumayo, 1998). The problem of deforestation as caused by charcoal
production is said to have a great significance on the Copperbelt, Central and Lusaka
Provinces, where 76% of the urban population lives (NEAP, 1994).
The other environmental problem associated with charcoal production is the production of
green house gases during carbonisation in the earth kilns, and this could be contributing to
the climate change problems facing Zambia. As for firewood, the problem of
deforestation is not severe in low-density rural areas where the use is specifically
domestic. This is because, dead wood is mostly collected and used as firewood.
However, studies in Siavonga (Kalyocha, 1997) and Luangwa (Kalyocha, 2000), show
that firewood collection is a major problem causing deforestation around villages along
the Rivers.
Firewood, in such circumstances is used mainly for fish smoking. Some tree species are
reported to be completely destroyed, for instance, the Mopane along the Zambezi River.
In densely populated and high fuel wood demand areas, it has also been noted that live
trees are felled in order to obtain firewood and charcoal.
27

--- Page 44 ---
Bush - Fires
Setting of bush-fires is a common phenomenon in the Zambian society. Some fires are,
however, set indiscriminately. Various communities set bush-fires for a number of
reasons which include among others the following: vegetation control and fire-breaks
around home steads and gardens, clearing of fields for cultivation, provision of potash,
visibility improvement during hunting as well as gathering and pasture management.
Fire destroys the vegetative cover in the agriculture area, which is meant to add organic
matter to the land. Indiscriminate late bush fires have been observed to reduce wood
annual increment by 50% in miombo woodland (NEAP, 1994). However, deliberate late
burning of pasturelands can indeed increase their productivity (a late season burn favours
regeneration of grasses, rather than woody species). In woodland areas, 75% of trees of
less than 3m high are generally susceptible to destruction (NCS, 1985) and late fires
destroy 84% of the herbage biomass (Chiti, et al, 1989). In tree-less areas, and in the dry
season, burning may promote soil erosion by wind and by water at the on-set of the rain
season before sufficient herbage cover develops (Ibid.). These factors reduce the
potential of the woodland to regenerate.
Over-Grazing
Zambia has on average a total herd of livestock of slightly over 2 million animals but
varies annually mainly due to animal mortality. The issue of over-grazing and
deforestation in Zambia depends on the type of management practices such as no
rotational grazing, no supplementary feeding system, no control of animal numbers
according to carrying capacity of the land and concentrating grazing pressure in localised
pastoral areas. The potential available pastureland is estimated at 10 million ha and only
2.7 million ha is available for dry season grazing (NCS, 1985). Dry season grazing is
concentrated in dambos and flood plains. The potential grazing land gives a carrying
capacity of 15 ha per animal as opposed to 5 ha per animal at the present use. Most of the
animal concentrations are in Regions I and II and most of the grazing is free-range on
communal areas. The concentration of grazing effort in localised areas without a
controlled range management system has resulted in over-grazing.
There is noticeable evidence of this phenomenon in Lusitu in Southern Province, Katete
(Kagoro) in Eastern Province and Luangwa in Lusaka Province.
Over grazed areas are bare with signs of gully formations and thus inducing lots of soil
erosion (Kalyocha, 2000).
The reasons for overgrazing and soil erosion are that:
(cid:1)(cid:2) Too many animals on a piece of land leading to over-grazing and trampling
causing compaction whose aggregates results into soil erosion.
(cid:1)(cid:2) Young bushes and trees are destroyed through browsing. Goats are particularly
destructive in this respect, leaving the land devoid of vegetation.
28

--- Page 45 ---
In the affected provinces, there have been some gradual deterioration in pastoral resource
base in localised areas linked to over-grazing and eventual soil erosion. The low
productivity and deaths of livestock reported in Eastern, Lusaka and Southern Provinces
(Section 2.3: Veterinary Department Annual Reports) could be attributed to disease, poor
management and range land degradation (NCS, 1985). This leads to a decline in the
animal productivity of range land vegetation.
The problem of over-grazing has also been observed in wildlife areas, especially in the
Luangwa Valley due to high densities of elephants in the 1970s (Caughley, 1975) and
hippos in the Luangwa River stretch (Kalyocha, 2000; Jachmann, 1994). Due to high
concentrations of the elephant populations in the 1970s, this exerted high browsing
pressure on the vegetation, particularly Mopane woodland and large areas were left bare.
With drought and the impact of fire, most of these areas have not regenerated and have
remained bare or have been converted into grasslands (Ibid). The increase in
concentrations of hippos in the Luangwa River (Central Luangwa Valley) in densities of
over 40 animals per km river stretch in recent years has been observed to correlate with
the elephant ‘problem’ but in turn is also causing grazing pressure on the riverine areas
(Jachmann, 1994). Signs of grazing pressure in form of soil compaction due to trampling,
erosion hills and gullies are evident in the Luangwa.
Due to nutritional stress as a result of habitat degradation in hippos, the reproductive rate
is delayed, and the animals are susceptible to high mortality when there is a disease out-
break, particularly anthrax (LIRDP 1996, Annual Report).
Encroachment and New Settlements
Deforestation is also caused by in-migrations in some areas that are forested and sensitive
to degradation. Out-migrations from Southern Province into Lusaka Rural due to
shortage of arable land is causing areas to be opened up for new settlements. A case in
point is the area from Chongwe to Rufunsa where new immigrants from Southern
Province have been settled in the margins of the Lower Zambezi National Park
(Kalyocha, 1997). About 400 ha have been deforested by new settlements and there have
been cultivations in the National Park (Kalumba, 1997).
Indigenous Knowledge and Technologies
There exist within the traditional land-use systems, practices that encourage conservation
of land resources and maintenance of soil productivity. They include zero tillage, inter-
cropping, crop rotations, strip farming, mulching, use of manure and many others. These
need to be documented and used in combating land degradation.
2.1.3 Institutional, Policy and Legal Issues
Zambia lacked a clear and consistent environmental management policy until the mid
1980s. Accordingly, environmental concerns were not a major input in the social and
economic development processes of the country. In addition to the absence of a
29

--- Page 46 ---
consolidated ‘environmental policy’, there has been a myriad of various pieces of
legislation dealing with different aspects of the environment, some dating as far back as
the pre-independence era and others have not been reviewed. These pieces of legislation
were scattered in different Acts relating to many activities such as use of water, wildlife,
land, mining and others. These have been noted to be rudimentary, sectoral, scattered and
at times contradictory to each other (Mweene, 1998, after Imboela, 1996).
The government attempted to overcome this problem through the formulation and
implementation of the National Conservation Strategy (NCS) in 1985. This saw and
marked the beginning of serious attempts by the government to incorporate environmental
management considerations including issues of land degradation in the mainstream
development process of the country. Apex institutions, Environmental Council of Zambia
(ECZ) and the Ministry of Tourism, Environment and Natural Resources (MTENR) were
created, including the enactment of the Environmental Protection and Pollution Control
Act (EPPCA).
Despite these developments, environmental management efforts are still sectoral,
scattered, out of date with present circumstances and uncoordinated with limited
institutional enforcement capacity and support (MENR, 1999). Currently, there is still no
consolidated policy and legislation for the environment, though the matter is being
addressed through the Environmental Support Programme (ESP). There is also inadequate
policy addressing desertification and drought. Zambia despite ratifying the UNCCD, has
not incorporated it in her legislation. However, a draft policy has been formulated with
regard to overall disaster management issues, but has not yet been ratified by Cabinet.
The decentralisation policy is also not yet ratified.
MTENR is addressing the problem of land degradation through the Environmental
Support Programme, existence of a National Focal Point (NFP) and National Steering
Committee (NSC) of the UNCCD. In order to adequately address the land degradation
problem, it is important to strengthen the co-ordination structure and also establish
frameworks at all levels that bring together stakeholders on the subject.
2.2 MANIFESTATIONS AND EFFECTS OF DESERTIFICATION PROBLEMS
Land degradation manifests itself through deforestation, biodiversity loss, soil erosion, soil
infertility, siltation, sedimentation and flooding.
Deforestation
Deforestation is the widespread removal and disappearance of vegetative cover as a result
of clearing of trees. In Zambia, the average rate at which forests are deforested is calculated
at 250,000-300,000 hectares per annum and the annual forest decrease factor is 0.5% on
average. The annual decrease factor of forests by the province is as follows: Copperbelt and
Lusaka have the highest at 20% per annum, followed by Southern (0.7%), Central (0.6%),
Eastern (0.5%), Luapula (0.5%) and Northern (0.3%). The least are Western (0.2%) and
North Western (0.2%). Deforestation is taking place both in forest reserves and open areas.
30

--- Page 47 ---
Management efforts appear to fail to halt the situation. These figures are, however,
conservative ones, as these estimates are based on the 1960s inventories and the rate of
deforestation could be higher at the present moment.
Field observations show clear signs of the problem the country is facing particularly around
big urban settlements. Statistics from isolated case studies based on analysis of land cover
maps, satellite images and aerial photography interpretation show that the problem is a
serious one. Four percent (4%) of Siavonga District, for instance, is reported to be
deforested (Kalyocha, 1997). Around Lusaka, particularly in east Chongwe, forests have
decreased on average at a rate of 3.2% per annum between 1989 and 1998, with a highest
rate of change of 8.8% occurring in munga woodland (Kalyocha, 2000 after Chaposa,
1999).
Biodiversity Loss
The increased over-exploitation of forest resources in peri-urban areas, high population
centres have posed problems resulting into deforestation and consequently loss of
biodiversity.
Some tree species that are threatened in Zambia include Daniellia alsteeniana,
Entandrophragma delevoyi, Baikiaea plurijuga, Podocarpus milanjianus, and
Encepharlotos goetzi. An example on tree species under pressure in Luangwa District as a
result of human population pressure and decentralisation has been given in Table 2 below.
With regards to wildlife, some species under threat due to either habitat destruction and/or
over utilisation are elephant, cheetah, eland, sable, roan, hartebeest, blue monkey, leopard
and wild dog (Kalyocha, 2000). A study of the trade and utilisation of game meat in
Zambia also added other species under threat to the list due to increased hunting pressure.
These include buffalo, kudu, warthog, impala and duiker (Kalyocha, 1998).
As for fish resources, some species have been recorded to be threatened due to over
utilisation and poor catch methods, for example, the lower Zambezi-Luangwa Valley
fishing system has recorded mud suckers, sailfin fish, breams and tiger fish to be threatened
(Ibid.). Farming activities are also reported to degrade the fishery habitats and breeding
areas of the wetlands due to drainage of water through cultivation.
The conservation and management of these fishery areas and important animal habitats in
the dry lands are very crucial for purposes of biodiversity conservation.
31

--- Page 48 ---
Table 3: Tree species extensively used and which are under Pressure in the
Luangwa Valley
Tree Species Most important use of the Other Uses
Tree
Mubuyu -Adansonia digitata Fibre Fruits, young leaves
for relish
Mululu-Khaya Nyasica (anthotheca) Timber and Canoes Firewood and
medicines
Mulombe-Pterocarpus angolensis Timber Medicine
Muzumba-Kirkia acuminata Timber
Mubanga-Pericopsis angolensis Poles for Construction Firewood, timber
Mupani-Colosphospermum Mopane Fire-wood, charcoal hard Used locally in
wood poles bridge construction,
handles for hand
tools
Mvungula (sausage Tree) Making of pounding
Kigelia africana mortars
Milaza (palm) Hyphaene vertricosa For making hand-crafts, for Food source in
example, baskets, hats and hunger periods.
many others
Reeds (Matete)-Phragnites mauritianus Making mats, chicken run,
coffins, and many others
Bamboos -Oxytenanthera For baskets (important in
plateau areas)
Black ebony-Dalbergia melanoxylon Carving (sold to markets in
Lusaka
Source: Kalyocha, 2000
Soil Erosion
There are many localised areas in which the problem of soil erosion has manifested itself
(Chiti, 1991, Chipungu, et al, 1994). Actual rates of erosion countrywide have not been
estimated, but visible evidence of the problem is observed in localised areas of Central,
Eastern, Lusaka and Southern Provinces. The problem of soil erosion was reported to be a
serious one in these provinces during the provincial workshops.
These areas have the most productive soils, which the country entirely depends on for
agricultural production. Given that in most Zambian soils, the highest nutrient concentration
is in the top 0-10 cm layer, soil erosion can result into considerable losses of plant nutrients
(NEAP, 1994).
The causes of erosion are rooted in poor land-use practices such as cultivation on sloppy
areas without conservation measures, shifting cultivation, continuous mono-cropping and
over-grazing which result into deforestation. Soil erosion in Zambia is correlated or
associated with areas with high rural population densities, high livestock populations and
32

--- Page 49 ---
high percentage of land under cultivation. The cost of soil erosion in terms of agricultural
productivity is very high. The most prevalent indicators of soil degradation are low crop
yields and low livestock productivity, causing shortages of food and food insecurity.
Farmers have therefore resorted to selling their animals, though of low quality, as a risk
avoidance strategy and at the same time raising income to purchase food.
Other factors Leading to Soil Infertility
Poor land management can lead to soil infertility. Apart from the problem of acidification
and soil compaction, the problem of salinalisation due to irrigation is yet another problem in
Zambia, though on a small scale. It is not a major problem as yet, partly due to the fact that
only a small hectarage (2%) of the estimated potential of the irrigatable land, (450, 000ha)
is under irrigation. But given the irrigation potential and the strong need to expand
irrigation schemes in these dryland areas as a result of drought, the problem of salinisation
can be exacerbated which can lead to soil degradation.
The need to properly investigate and provide the appropriate irrigation system is strongly
emphasised. The key to good irrigation is good drainage. If irrigated land is not drained
properly, the soils first become waterlogged and then salinised or alkalinised. It, therefore,
becomes difficult to cultivate as the evaporation of water from the soil increases, reducing
the available moisture for crops.
Siltation, Sedimentation and Flooding
There is visible evidence of the problems of siltation, sedimentation and flooding in
Zambia, although the rates and extent of the problems are not well documented and known
particularly in the southern region. These problems were clearly cited in all the five
provinces of Regions I and II at the provincial workshops.
Deforestation in uplands and cultivation along river/stream banks, culminates in soil
erosion and choking up of streams/rivers with silt and sediments. When there is an intensive
storm, this results in flush flooding of these streams. For example, the Luangwa (formerly
known as Feira) District, Lusitu area in Southern Province and Central Luangwa Valley
area in Eastern Province are cases in point where these processes have been seen to occur
(Kalyocha, 2000; Siamwiza, 1998; Kalyocha, 1988 and Larsen, et al, 1985).
These processes also make people who cultivate along the stream/river banks to lose their
crops due to flooding and layering of the fields with sand/silt after a flood (Kalyocha, 1988;
2000).
There is a problem of drying-up of streams and rivers. This problem is due to a
combination of low ground water recharges, soil erosion and drought (Kalyocha, 2000). In
recent years, however, even seasonality has rapidly diminished for most of the
streams/rivers. Water is only available just when the rain falls, but quickly runs off or dries
up in a few days.
33

--- Page 50 ---
2.3 THE IMPLICATIONS OF THE DESERTIFICATION PROBLEM
Some Consequences and Costs of Desertification
The impacts of desertification at a local scale are very negative. These cause low
productivity of the land to support natural veld, livestock and crop. They in turn have social
economic consequences.
Other environmental costs at a local scale that are directly or indirectly associated with land
degradation are loss of shade, shelter and visual amenities. Any changes in the productivity
of the land have consequences on agricultural production in Zambia and in turn on the
social economic well being of the people. The increasing spates of drought occurrence and
prevalence of land degradation problems have had dramatic impact on agricultural
production, especially on small-scale farmers in the severely affected provinces
(Agricultural Statistical Bulletin, Policy and Planning Division, MAFF, 1999/2000).
In Zambia, there has been a general decline in total cultivated hectarage from 1, 004, 300 in
1989/90 to 701, 500 hectares in 1997/98, a decline of over 30%. Furthermore, the average
maize yield (the main staple food crop in Zambia) per hectare decreased from 1.48 tons in
1989/90 to 1.27 in 1997/98. The 1989/90 yield is three times less than the expected average
yield.
25000000
20000000
15000000
10000000
5000000
0
1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999
Years
Figure 7: Maize Production (kg) from 1987 to 1999 (Agricultural Statistical
Bulletin, Policy and Planning Division, MAFF, 1999/2000).
The poor performance of the agricultural sector has been attributed to the following drought
related problems, which stand out as most significant:
(cid:1)(cid:2) Reoccuring droughts in the 1990s have made farming rather unpredictable and risky
(cid:1)(cid:2) High costs of inputs. With land degradation problems the need for farm inputs
(fertilisers) becomes imperative. The 1990s have been characterised by the full
implementation of the market policies, resulting in total removal of subsidies on all
agricultural inputs. This has made many farmers unable to access agricultural inputs.
(cid:1)(cid:2) Reduction in the number of work oxen has been mainly due to animal disease
exacerbated by drought.
34
k(
noitcudorP
eziaM

--- Page 51 ---
At global level, land degradation has implications on flood occurrence, ground water
recharge systems due to high run-off rates and siltation/ sedimentation of rivers. The
consequences of vegetation cover removal have implications on sinks for carbon dioxide
and this can result into destabilisation of the climate particularly temperature regimes.
35

--- Page 52 ---
CHAPTER THREE: RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN NAP AND OTHER PROGRAMMES:
AN ANALYSIS
3.1 Analysis of multi-sectoral Environmental Programmes in relation to the NAP
NEAP and ESP
The 1985 National Conservation Strategy that aimed at incorporating environmental
management in the national development processes of the country was recognised to have a
few inadequacies. These included the following:
(cid:1)(cid:2) The economy was undergoing a period of liberalisation, and as such, there was need
to review and integrate environmental concerns into the social and economic
development process of the country, consistent with the country’s new market
economic orientation. These formed the main guiding objectives for the NEAP.
(cid:1)(cid:2) Against the above, there was need to make provisions for new opportunities for
involvement of local communities, the private sector, NGOs and CBOs in the
management of the environment while at the same time recognising the important role
for government in monitoring, regulation and enforcement of appropriate resource-use
in the interest of sustainable development.
The other reason for the preparation of the NEAP was that the main recommendations of
the NCS had been implemented, hence a re-orientated programme was a necessity.
The NEAP is a comprehensive document that was developed through the participatory
analysis of the environmental situation and management, which resulted in the
identification of key environmental issues facing Zambia. The five major environmental
problems isolated in the NEAP are land degradation, deforestation, air pollution in the
mining areas, water pollution and inadequate sanitation, and wildlife (game and fish)
depletion. It reviewed the weaknesses in existing legislation and institutions and provided
strategy options for improvement of environmental quality. The NEAP also provides
updated environmental policy actions and forms the basis for the future development of an
investment plan for its implementation. The need for supporting the public, the private
sector and community based approaches in environmental and natural resources
management was strongly recommended. This is consistent with the guiding principles of
the Convention to Combat Desertification.
The areas of relevance to the Convention to Combat Desertification from the NEAP
document include the following:
(cid:1)(cid:2) Institutions and Environmental Legislation
(cid:1)(cid:2) Economic Development and the Environment
(cid:1)(cid:2) Agriculture
(cid:1)(cid:2) Renewable Natural Resources
(cid:1)(cid:2) Human Population
(cid:1)(cid:2) Energy Resources
(cid:1)(cid:2) Environmental Education, and
36

--- Page 53 ---
(cid:1)(cid:2) Environmental Issues in the Provinces.
There are some areas which, do not feature prominently in the NEAP but are of great
concern under the CCD. These include the strengthening of the early warning systems,
utilisation and development of indigenous knowledge, transfer of appropriate technology to
the community level and the area of information collection, management and exchange
including the aspect of impact indicators. These gaps are very important areas of entry and
support by the NAP.
The recommendations of the NEAP are being implemented through the Environmental
Support Programme (ESP), an environmental investment fund, mainly supported by IDA
(World Bank). The ESP is aimed at mainstreaming environmental and natural resources
management in Zambia’s development processes at both the national and local level, so as
to tackle the root causes of environmental degradation. The ESP Phase I was initiated in
1998 and will run up to 2003, under the auspices of the MTENR. The major components
covered by the programme are:
(cid:1)(cid:2) Strengthening the Institutional, legal and regulatory framework. This includes
implementation of the Community Environmental Management Programme (CEMP)
(cid:1)(cid:2) Strengthening Environmental Education and Public Awareness
(cid:1)(cid:2) Undertaking pilot activities to strengthen community-level environment and natural
resources through provision of matching grants through Pilot Environmental Fund
(PEF) for community initiatives and for environmental studies
(cid:1)(cid:2) Building environmental information management systems
(cid:1)(cid:2) Community Based Natural Resources Management Programme in Western Province.
As Zambia aims to reduce poverty from the current level of about 70% of the households to
50% by the year 2005, the above areas are pivotal to the sound environmental conservation
which in turn are important elements in achieving a clean and healthy environment. Their
achievements are, therefore, a necessary pre-condition to achieving sustainable
development.
This is in line with provisions of the Agenda 21, which recommended that member states
make provisions for their national development plans, programmes and policies to be in
harmony with sustainable development goals.
The implications for NAP are that the NEAP/ESP already forms a foundation on which to
build upon, as these programmes are consistent with the CCD. Therefore, the NAP needs
only to add value to the strategies identified, putting emphasis on community-based
approaches and increased participation of stakeholders.
37

--- Page 54 ---
National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan (NBSAP)
Zambia is a party to the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) which it ratified on 28th
May 1993. In trying to meet its obligations, the government in 1997, through the MTENR
initiated the preparation of the NBSAP to provide a basis for the implementation of the
CBD.
The NBSAP document was finalised and adopted by Government. The NBSAP reviewed
and provided information on the following with regard to biodiversity conservation in
Zambia:
(cid:1)(cid:2) Current status of biodiversity
(cid:1)(cid:2) Pressures and threats to biodiversity
(cid:1)(cid:2) Institutional and legal frameworks
The above analysis provided a framework of strategies and actions to address the following
areas:
(cid:1)(cid:2) Conservation of biodiversity
(cid:1)(cid:2) Sustainable use of biodiversity
(cid:1)(cid:2) Equitable sharing, and
(cid:1)(cid:2) Bio-safety
Arising from this strategy and action plan, several biodiversity programmes have emerged:
(cid:1)(cid:2) Lake Tanganyika Biodiversity Project, formerly known as the Pollution Control and
other measures to Protect Biodiversity in Lake Tanganyika under ECZ,
(cid:1)(cid:2) The Integrated Dry Land Biodiversity Conservation Project in Semi-Arid Areas of
Lower Zambezi-Luangwa Valley Region (ICBD),
(cid:1)(cid:2) The Lukanga Swamps Biodiversity Conservation, and
(cid:1)(cid:2) Reclassification and Sustainable Management of Zambia’s Protected Areas System
The ICBD, Lukanga Swamps Biodiversity Conservation and Reclassification and
Sustainable Management of Zambia’s Protected Areas System are still in their preparatory
stages.
The UNCCD has synergies with other global conventions (CBD, UNFCCC) and these
programmes form part of the UNCCD initiatives and shall need to be supported in terms of
completion of their preparation and implementation phases.
3.2 Analysis of other Environmental and Natural Resources Programmes in relation to
the NAP
Parallel to the developments above, the Government has been implementing processes
aimed at reviewing various natural resources sectoral policies and legislation to give more
explicit rights to stake-holders, communities and the private sector. These sectors include
forestry, wildlife, water, energy and fisheries.
38

--- Page 55 ---
The Forestry Sector
The status of the forestry resources has been deteriorating over the past years. Given the
importance of the forestry sector to the economy and the environment, the Government
initiated a process in 1993 to 1997 to prepare a 20 year Zambia Forest Action Plan (ZFAP)
to address this problem. The main objective of ZFAP is to provide for the national
management and conservation of forest resources in order to enhance the contribution of
the forest sector to social economic development, poverty reduction and the improvement
of food security. This process has led to the review of the Forest Policy of 1965 and Forest
Act of 1973. The main essence for the review of the Policy and Act was to provide for a
mechanism to enhance the participation of local communities and other stake-holders
particularly private sector in the management of the forestry resources. The Government
has since adopted the New Forest Policy of 1998.
The action programmes elaborated by ZFAP include the following:
(cid:1)(cid:2) The Indigenous Forest Management and Biodiversity sub-programme
(cid:1)(cid:2) The Tree and Forest Development sub-programme
(cid:1)(cid:2) The Forestry Industry and Non-Wood Forest Products Development Sub-programme
(cid:1)(cid:2) The Woodfuel Energy Development Sub-programme
The above sub-programmes are front-line activities with direct impact on the forest sector
development objectives. They are complemented by the supportive sub-programmes and
a series of forest sector policy actions and institutional strengthening activities, which
promote sustainable forest resources management namely:
(cid:1)(cid:2) The Forest Education and Training Sub-programme
(cid:1)(cid:2) The Forest Research and Extension Sub-programme, and
(cid:1)(cid:2) The Policy, Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation Sub-programme.
These will require to be reinforced by encouraging the Private Sector and NGOs to
participate in sustainable forest management. The actions to strengthen these programmes
need to be supported by the private sector incentives, to encourage investment in sound
forest management.
The Forest Department in Luapula, Copperbelt, Southern and Central Provinces is
undertaking the promotion of forest management involving indigenous systems as well as
local district administration.
The Provincial Forestry Action Programme (PFAP), which is being funded by FINNIDA
focuses on Joint Forest Management Systems (JFMs), a participatory methodology which
is action oriented and promotes co-operation and the sustainable management culture. The
client groups and stakeholders of PFAP include individuals and households dependent on
forests, rural and urban communities, Private Sector enterprises, NGOs, CBOs, forestry
industry, mining and politicians.
The project also undertakes vegetation mapping through ground surveys, aerial
photography and use of remote sensing satellite imagery to determine the status and
39

--- Page 56 ---
trends in forest resources and the extent of their utilisation. The Forests Bill has been
enacted and this will enable full implementation of the JFMs.
The ZFAP is, therefore, a very promising model in terms of its aims to contribute to
sustainable economic development through its sub-programmes. However, support and
investment in the sub-programmes is still required to meet the objectives of ZFAP. The
UNCCD-NAP has an opportunity for complementing the ZFAP initiatives.
The ZFAP ultimate objectives and its programmes are indeed in line with those of the
UNCCD, which focus on contributing to social economic development through
sustainable economic growth and reducing poverty. The support of the UNCCD-NAP to
the implementation of ZFAP will require an assessment of current investment gaps and
support requirements in the forest sector to determine and optimise UNCCD-NAP’s
commitments. Since the PFAP initiative is operational only in four provinces of Zambia,
two of which do not fall in the NAP priority areas, there is need through the NAP to
extend the programme to the other provinces, especially the ones severely degraded in
Regions I and II.
Wildlife Sector
The wildlife resource despite its importance and potential in contributing to social
economic development and biological functioning of ecosystems has been depleting over
the years due to poorly financed and poor management systems supported by weak
legislation. These threats necessitated the Zambian Government to review its management
systems as early as the 1980s. This review resulted in the assertion that the problem of
the wildlife resource decline was largely due to social economic factors, which had not
been considered in the conventional management designs. This called for an integrated
approach to wildlife management including community participation in decision making,
revenue sharing and resources management through the Village Wildlife Scout
Programme. This saw the implementation of the Administrative Management Design
(ADMADE) and the South Luangwa Area Management Unit (SLAMU), as community-
based wildlife management approaches. The ADMADE programme differs from LIRDP
in terms of revenue sharing mechanisms (systems) between the community and the
Government integrated nature of the programmes, the community structures that have
been put in place and the operational areas.
Although the concepts are highly innovative and could contribute significantly to wildlife
conservation, the successes of these programmes have been limited and mixed, due to
various reasons including inadequate legal backing to support community participation
(Kalyocha, 2000). However, the Government in 1998 formulated the Wildlife Policy and
reviewed the principal Wildlife Act of 1991. The Policy and the revised Act of 1998
provides for the formation of ZAWA which was charged with the following
responsibilities:
(cid:1)(cid:2) Conservation and management of wildlife resources and their ecosystems in national
parks, game management areas and outside national parks, to ensure ecological
integrity,
40

--- Page 57 ---
(cid:1)(cid:2) Promotion of Community Participation through establishment of Community
Resource Boards to support the above,
(cid:1)(cid:2) Preparation of Management Plans to guide management of wildlife resources and
their sustainable use, and
(cid:1)(cid:2) Support to the Tourism Industry through creation of an enabling environment for the
Private Sector.
In this light, UNCCD-NAP has the basis for intervention in ZAWA to support
biodiversity management in the areas of institutional capacity building and community
participation.
As wildlife can contribute to economic development through tourism, ranching and safari-
hunting, efforts to support these industries, for example, infrastructure development and
support to conservation efforts including those emphasising private entrepreneurship, like
ranching need to be strengthened. The support should be directed at ecologically marginal
areas for agriculture but suited to wildlife management, particularly in the five provinces
of Regions I and II.
Water Programmes
The government in 1993, developed a water policy to guide developments in the
management, demand and supply of water as an important resource in the country. This is
in line with the changing macro-economic environment as well as to address an inherent
weak institutional capacity, which is unable to prevent deterioration of facilities and
service delivery. In addition, the Government in 1995 prepared the National Water
Resources Management Plan and the Water Resources Action Programme in the year
2000. Sustainable water resources management is an integral requirement for the
Convention and is certainly a NAP activity, especially in implementing the recent Water
Resources Action Programme. It is important to identify and assess programmes to be
supported by the NAP. Such programmes can include facilitation of community
management of water supply points, capacity building in the Department in feasibility
studies and construction of irrigation facilities, resource mobilisation and allocation for
construction of water facilities, training, promoting sustainable water harvesting
techniques and many others.
Current on-going water development projects that need to be consolidated in terms of
implementation through NAP include:
(cid:1)(cid:2) Groundwater development (Northern Province)
(cid:1)(cid:2) Ground water development (Central, Copperbelt and Lusaka Provinces)
(cid:1)(cid:2) Rural water for Health (North-western)
(cid:1)(cid:2) Groundwater development (Eastern)
(cid:1)(cid:2) Groundwater Development (Southern)
(cid:1)(cid:2) Rehabilitation and Construction of Dams
(cid:1)(cid:2) Rural Water Development
(cid:1)(cid:2) Water Resources Assessment
41

--- Page 58 ---
Constraints hindering successful implementation of the above projects, particularly the
GRZ supported projects include: inadequate capital allocation; late releases of capital
funds; inadequate developed human resources due to brain drain, inadequate transport and
equipment and community participation projects which are slow in implementation.
These are clear and obvious areas for intervention and support by the NAP.
Fisheries programmes
The Fisheries Industry does contribute to desertification along riverbanks or lake shores
because firewood is used for drying fish. Cutting trees for firewood leads to deforestation.
Deforestation can lead to soil erosion, biodiversity loss, land degradation, soil infertility,
siltation and flooding along riverbanks and lakeshores.
To address this concern the Government has prepared programmes on fish conservation.
These programmes provide a basis for NAP intervention, especially in the areas of finding
alternative methods of drying fish and having fish as alternative livelihood for rural
communities living in land degraded areas
3.3. Analysis of Programmes promoting Sustainable Development in relation to the NAP
ZAMSIF and PRSP
The Zambia Social Investment Fund (ZAMSIF) formerly, Social Sector Rehabilitation
Programme (SSRP) is a programme under the Ministry of Finance and National Planning
and is supported by the EU and World Bank. It aims to promote social development and
reduce poverty through increased GRZ financing to the social sector. ZAMSIF has sub-
programmes, Micro Projects Programme (MPP), the Social Recovery Project (SRP) and
Social Safety Net (SSN). MPP supports projects that are proposed and implemented by
the local people, including administration of funds. The SRP supports community
initiatives to help protect the poor during the SAPs. The projects under this programme
include health, nutrition, education and economic infrastructure. However, in both the
MPP and SRP communities contribute labour, material or cash, as a way of sustaining the
projects.
The Social Safety Net (SSN) provides cushion from the impacts of SAP on vulnerable
groups. This is done by providing material support for self-help projects and financial
and skills training to the poor.
The role of UNCCD-NAP in ZAMSIF shall be to encourage Debt-Swaps and ensure that
debt-relief-savings are invested in the economic and social sectors. In recognition of the
fact that these programmes did not put emphasis on environmental and natural resources
management, the ESP established the PEF under MPP to integrate environmental
concerns in community development. The PEF is aimed at facilitating community
participation in small-scale environmental studies and micro-projects. There is strong
need, therefore, for close collaboration on issues dealing with land degradation.
42

--- Page 59 ---
The Zambian Government has worked on the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP)
that elaborates and provides additional programmes to the existing efforts directed at
poverty reduction. The paper was prepared through analysis of current developmental
issues and efforts in the sectors of Agriculture, Mining, Industry, Tourism, Health,
Education, Water, Sanitation, Environment, Housing and Resettlement. The PRSP has
proposed action areas and strategies to reduce poverty and support income-generating
activities.
The Agricultural Sector Investment Programme (ASIP),
ASIP I was originally designed to rationalise donor support to the Ministry of Agriculture
and Co-operatives in order to create an enabling environment to support agricultural
development in 1992. The programme only started in 1996 and was financed as follows:
60% from multilateral and bilateral partners and 40% from Government.
The ASIP I development goals were:
(cid:1)(cid:2) Food security at both household and national level;
(cid:1)(cid:2) Sustainability of the existing agricultural resources (land, water, and air);
(cid:1)(cid:2) Generation of incomes through employment creation;
(cid:1)(cid:2) Contribution to the Country’s sustainable industrial base;
(cid:1)(cid:2) Contribution to the country’s balance of payment support through agricultural exports.
The above goals were to be realised through the following broad-based strategies:
(cid:1)(cid:2) Diversification of crop production and promotion of drought tolerant crop species
(millet, sorghum and cassava) in drought prone areas;
(cid:1)(cid:2) Efficient delivery of services to small scale holders;
(cid:1)(cid:2) Expanded opportunities for outlying areas;
(cid:1)(cid:2) Improvement in the economic status of women;
(cid:1)(cid:2) Improved use of available water resources; and
(cid:1)(cid:2) Emphasis on sustainable agriculture.
Sustainable agriculture, among other things is to be achieved through some of the above
stated strategies, which promote production of both cereal and leguminous crops on a
rotational basis and improved water management. Other measures embedded in
sustainable agriculture are reduction of soil erosion through appropriate farming practices
such as contour ploughing and minimising adverse effects of changing technologies on
the environment.
Most of the works on sustainable agriculture are being implemented through the Land
Management and Conservation Farming Project (LM&CF) supported by SIDA. The
project has been in operation in some of the areas of Regions I and II since the 1980s. Its
main objective is to promote improved and sustainable agricultural productivity through
technologies that emphasise good management of the organic matter of the soil and
rainwater. The main activities of the LM&CF Programme carried out with a gender
perspective include training, promotion of physical and biological soil conservation
43

--- Page 60 ---
structures, soil fertility, rain water management, farm forestry, range and pasture
management.
At the moment, MACO is working on Agricultural Commercialisation Programme
(ACP), as a successor to ASIP. The NAP can contribute to agricultural development
through support to the strategies, which are aimed at achieving food security, land
resources conservation, economic development and poverty reduction.
The National Population Policy
The National Population Policy was adopted in 1989. This Policy recognises the need to
integrate population issues into development planning. To translate this into an action
oriented tool, government prepared a National Population and Development Programme
of Action (1996-2015). This document further reviewed the Population Policy in the light
of current social economic conditions (MoFED, 1996). The National Population and
Development Programme has a strong relevance to the implementation of the CCD, in
that reduced population growth will entail reduced dependence on natural resources such
as woodfuel and reduced expansion of settlements and cultivated areas, which increase
the problem of deforestation. The NAP should, therefore, support the implementation of
the Population Policy in order to reduce the impact of human population and its activities
on the quality and availability of land resources, thereby improving the quality of human
life.
The Energy Policy
Zambia’s energy policy aims at investigating and developing other forms of energy using
appropriate technology which is environmentally friendly. Currently, the Department of
Energy is implementing a project in the Eastern Province on the use of solar energy for
lighting. The University of Zambia through the Technology and Development Unit and
the National Institute for Scientific and Industrial Research in collaboration with the
Institute of Social and Economic Research has been working on developing these
technologies.
Similar programmes under the rural electrification project and works by NGOs and other
supporting agencies such as YWCA, Africare, GTZ in the promotion of heat serving
stoves, biogas, coal briquette braziers and low cost sources of lighting have been
encouraged under the Energy Policy. This is a very good avenue for NAP intervention.
Gender Policy
It has been noticed that segregation and imbalances exist in the Zambian society between
various social groups, in particular men and women. The Zambian Policy on Gender
focuses on reducing the gap, by emphasising the involvement of women in all
development aspects and promoting the welfare of women as well as other disadvantaged
groups particularly the girl child. This is in line with the requirements of the NAP, which
places emphasis on gender considerations in all programmes.
44

--- Page 61 ---
3.4. Other on going programmes in relation to the NAP
In addition to the above initiatives, government has continued to implement and support
other on-going programmes that improve the quality of life in Zambia. These include the
Road Sector Investment Programme, the Education Sector Integrated Programme,
Health Sector Reform Programme and the Public Sector Reform Programme. The
common feature of all these programmes is the increased recognition of decentralization
of power to lower levels, paying particular attention to capacity building, provision of
infrastructure and equipment, logistics and adequate funding. Limited capacity by
government to support the implementation of the reforms has resulted in the failure to
achieve the intended objectives and support to institutions and promote social welfare. In
view of this, attention could be paid to some NGO led programmes with objectives on
desertification.
In line with the Convention, the NAP should elaborate and implement sustainable income
generating activities to improve livelihood and reduce poverty, which is one of the root
causes of land degradation.
45

--- Page 62 ---
CHAPTER FOUR: PROGRAMME AREAS
4.1 Programme Vision
To restore land productivity by using sustainable means of conserving it in order to reduce
poverty and foster sustainable development.
4.2 Programme Purpose
The purpose of NAP is to identify the factors contributing to desertification and put in place
practical measures necessary to combat desertification and mitigate the effects of drought.
4.3 Programme Objectives
The NAP aims at contributing to sustainable environmental management through the
reduction/control of land degradation, thereby contributing to Poverty Reduction, Food
self-sufficiency and Food Security and ultimately contributing to Economic Growth. Its
immediate objectives are:
(cid:1)(cid:2) Reduce the destruction of land resources in affected areas
(cid:1)(cid:2) Promote sustainable use of land resources
(cid:1)(cid:2) Increase public awareness and information dissemination on matters of land
degradation
(cid:1)(cid:2) Provide a suitable policy and legislative framework for the implementation of NAP
(cid:1)(cid:2) Establish and support effective administrative and co-ordination of the NAP
(cid:1)(cid:2) Introduce and improve on assessments, planning and monitoring systems for the
effective management of NAP, and
(cid:1)(cid:2) Establish partnerships with multi-lateral and bilateral institutions in the management of
arid areas.
4.4 Identified Programme Areas of Intervention
To achieve the stated objectives, the following programme areas have been proposed
according to their priority:
(cid:1)(cid:2) Early Warning and Preparedness
(cid:1)(cid:2) Forestry, Ecosystems and Species Conservation
(cid:1)(cid:2) Water Catchment and Energy Conservation
(cid:1)(cid:2) Collaboration and Networking
(cid:1)(cid:2) Capacity Building of Programme Co-ordination Unit and Other Focal Persons
(cid:1)(cid:2) Extension, Public Awareness, and Information Dissemination
(cid:1)(cid:2) Land Degradation Assessments, Monitoring and Reporting
(cid:1)(cid:2) Easy to use environmentally friendly technologies including Indigenous Knowledge
(cid:1)(cid:2) Livelihood Improvement
(cid:1)(cid:2) Food Self Sufficiency and Food Security
(cid:1)(cid:2) Human Settlement Management, and
(cid:1)(cid:2) Legal and Policy Reviews
46

--- Page 63 ---
Early Warning and Preparedness
Zambia produces crop weather bulletins every ten (10) days during the rainy season. Crop
forecasts are issued by the National Early Warning Systems (NEWS). The problem of few
reliable weather stations, limited network of rain gauges and communication radios
affects the accuracy and quality of data. However, satellite information is used to
complement these efforts.
The methods of crop forecasts have severe limitations in terms of producing reliable data.
Current methods do not take cognisance of inter-crops in individual farmers’ fields. There
are problems of estimating planted areas and yields for crops grown. There are errors in
estimates, which affect the results of the information produced on crop forecasting (The
Zambian Farmer, Vol. 4, No. 4, September, 2000).
Apart from the above deficiencies, the response capacity in Zambia on the part of
Government is limited due to inadequate financial resources (Mtolo, pers, commun).
Given this situation, the strengthening of the early warning and preparedness systems,
which is also emphasised in the CCD, shall be achieved through the following
interventions:
(cid:1)(cid:2) Assess the current early warning and preparedness systems,
(cid:1)(cid:2) Improve the early warning and response capacities,
(cid:1)(cid:2) Evaluate current strategies and methodologies (for example Vulnerability Assessment
Mapping) for assessing the impacts of climate variability on natural resources and
humans in terms of easy-to-use, accurate information collected and quick production
of results,
(cid:1)(cid:2) Utilise predictions of climatic variability in an effort to mitigate the effects of drought
by ensuring that information reaches decision makers, planners and affected
populations in good time,
(cid:1)(cid:2) Develop sustainable and appropriate programmes for both crops and livestock, and
(cid:1)(cid:2) Support national centres/ institutions by providing them with adequate financial
resources, better equipment for the enhancement of procurement, processing and
dissemination of information about natural disasters, such as drought and floods.
Forestry, Ecosystems and Species Conservation
There should be a deliberate effort to protect and manage existing forests and conserve
sensitive ecosystems. The following are the suggested interventions:
(cid:1)(cid:2) Promote and support a programme of afforestation, community plantations and
agroforestry,
(cid:1)(cid:2) Direct work of extension on organising and training communities in preparing and
maintaining community owned nurseries and fodder banks for supplying planting
materials, managing wood lots, and in sustainable utilisation of these resources,
(cid:1)(cid:2) Promote awareness creation and train communities to draft and implement by-laws in
order to sensitise communities to reduce indiscriminate cutting of trees,
47

--- Page 64 ---
(cid:1)(cid:2) Introduce and implement an incentive scheme to encourage communities to plant and
replant trees within their vicinities,
(cid:1)(cid:2) Emphasise on selection and proliferation of appropriate indigenous drought tolerant
species especially leguminous species and promotion of indigenous technologies,
(cid:1)(cid:2) Determine the current status of forests and deforestation by land-cover maps, use of
remote sensing techniques and ground surveys in order to manage the forests
properly,
(cid:1)(cid:2) Review the list of species being affected as a result of deforestation and land
degradation, and
(cid:1)(cid:2) Revise legislation on endangered species accordingly to provide for their protection.
Water Catchment and Energy Conservation
To effectively manage the catchment areas, the following programme interventions are
proposed:
(cid:1)(cid:2) Promote preparation and implementation of community catchment plans on public
and customary forestlands on a sustainable use basis,
(cid:1)(cid:2) Promote techniques for the development of surface and ground water for humans,
agriculture and livestock,
(cid:1)(cid:2) Encourage rain water harvesting including damming for interception of seasonal
streams, grass strips and crop mulching,
(cid:1)(cid:2) Promote small scale irrigation schemes as well as adoption of appropriate irrigation
methods,
(cid:1)(cid:2) Promote increased tree planting in degraded areas,
(cid:1)(cid:2) Promote reduced use of wood fuel through the use of fuel-efficient stoves for wood
and charcoal using models that are culturally adaptable, and
(cid:1)(cid:2) Develop and promote low-cost alternative sources of energy (non-wood fuels), for
example
(cid:1)(cid:2)briquetting of agricultural residuals and coal,
(cid:1)(cid:2)solar drying for preserving perishable foods, vegetables and fish,
(cid:1)(cid:2)solar water distillation technologies for water supply,
(cid:1)(cid:2)wind pumps for water supply and irrigation,
(cid:1)(cid:2)wind turbines for grain milling,
(cid:1)(cid:2)biomass gasifiers and biogas digesters,
(cid:1)(cid:2)promotion of rural electrification, and
(cid:1)(cid:2)production of non- edible and edible seed oils as diesel fuel extenders and
substitutes in remote rural areas with suitable ecologies.
(cid:1)(cid:2) Promote photo-voltaic electricity applications for:
(cid:1)(cid:2)rural health centres
(cid:1)(cid:2)water supply and irrigation
(cid:1)(cid:2)cottage industries
(cid:1)(cid:2) Promote awareness among the local population through massive campaigns about the
value of the water catchments and trees in particular.
48

--- Page 65 ---
Collaboration and Networking
There is need to forge and strengthen regional linkages and collaboration on matters of land
degradation through promotion of exchange of research data, training, public awareness
and early warning. Collaboration could also be enhanced with such regional institutions:
(cid:1)(cid:2) The Regional Early Warning System based in Harare for SADC,
(cid:1)(cid:2) The Eastern and Southern Africa Early Warning System based in Nairobi,
(cid:1)(cid:2) The SADC- Environment and Land Management Sector based in Lesotho, and
(cid:1)(cid:2) The Kalahari-Namib Programme with headquarters in Gobabob, Namibia.
Collaboration should be enforced through training programmes, exchange visits, workshops
and meetings.
Capacity Building of the Programme Co-ordinating Unit and Other Focal Persons
The success of the proposed programmes shall depend on the capacity of government and
other stakeholders including the local population to manage the programmes. This shall
require adequate training of the personnel. The Programme interventions include the
following:
(cid:1)(cid:2) Carryout an overall needs assessment of the various stakeholders’ requirements as a
prerequisite to supporting the various institutions. Although the capacities of NGOs and
CBOs have been assessed, some of the training programmes that need to be advanced to
the grassroots, in particular, should cover the following areas:
(cid:1)(cid:2) Provide adequate training to personnel and communities, in technical and
administrative skills, as well as, handling equipment and managing logistics,
(cid:1)(cid:2) Environmental management for development,
(cid:1)(cid:2) Integrated natural resources management,
(cid:1)(cid:2) Development and leadership skills including those of women,
(cid:1)(cid:2) Planning, management and co-ordination, and
(cid:1)(cid:2) Training of trainers in project management and communication skills.
Extension, Public Awareness and Information Dissemination
Availability and timely provision of information is vital in the decision making process at
any level. The following interventions are proposed in the area of extension, public
awareness and information dissemination:
(cid:1)(cid:2) Formulate an effective outreach programme through extension, public awareness and
information dissemination mechanisms.
(cid:1)(cid:2) Conduct massive campaigns to educate the people on the problems of desertification
and general natural resources management in the affected areas. This could be done
through mass media, distribution of pamphlets and booklets, newsletters, exhibitions
and popular public theatres and drama.
49

--- Page 66 ---
(cid:1)(cid:2) Arrange and support exchange visits for farmers’ groups, extension and project
management staff to visit other similar programmes in the country and/or in the sub-
region.
(cid:1)(cid:2) Undertake skills training for farmers and extension workers to enhance sustainable
natural resource utilisation and income generating activities such as training in pit-
sawing and carpentry, bee-keeping and honey processing, and other various resources-
use activities that need to be highly supported to enhance self-employment
opportunities.
Land Degradation Assessments, Monitoring and Reporting
The assessment and monitoring of desertification should include:
(cid:1)(cid:2) Provision of bench marks for assessing land degradation,
(cid:1)(cid:2) Assessing the extent and status of land degradation,
(cid:1)(cid:2) Ensuring that environmental impact assessments for all major proposed interventions
are conducted,
(cid:1)(cid:2) Putting in place monitoring and reporting mechanisms, particularly through monthly,
quarterly, and annual reporting on desertification.
(cid:1)(cid:2) Putting in place mechanisms for annual, mid-term and end of phase reviews.
(cid:1)(cid:2) Promoting the participation of all stake-holders in land degradation assessments,
monitoring and reporting
Easy-to-use Environmental Friendly Technologies including Indigenous Knowledge
Interventions under this programme area shall include:
(cid:1)(cid:2) Undertake an inventory to take stock of existing knowledge and technologies
(cid:1)(cid:2) Use identified indigenous knowledge systems in combating land degradation and
mitigating the effects of drought
(cid:1)(cid:2) Emphasise on increased awareness and incentive scheme support to increase farmers’
adoption rates
(cid:1)(cid:2) Promote technological transfer through conventional management and conservation
technologies. The technologies being promoted by LM&CF include contour ridging,
vetivar grass strips, use of green manure, improved fallow, rain water harvesting, deep
rip ploughing, farm forestry, intensification, are aspects in the right direction, and
(cid:1)(cid:2) Use of traditional rulers and their administrative structures to spread knowledge and
energy conservation practices.
Livelihood Improvement
The programme interventions suggested to improve livelihood are Agricultural
Development (crops and livestock, irrigation development, infrastructure development
(road, irrigation, marketing centres) and Community Management of Game, Forests and
Fisheries.
50

--- Page 67 ---
Game Management
Under Game Management, the interventions proposed are:
(cid:1)(cid:2) Empowerment of the local communities to manage the game resources. Currently, the
majority of local communities do not feel adequately involved in the management of
their wildlife. This attitude needs to be reversed.
(cid:1)(cid:2) Promotion of income generating schemes for the communities and the private sector,
for example, ranching, culling schemes, safari hunting, and tourism through provision
of incentives.
(cid:1)(cid:2) Sustainable land use.
(cid:1)(cid:2) Capacity building of local communities on various aspects of wildlife management.
(cid:1)(cid:2) Review and strengthen the village scouts programme under ADMADE.
(cid:1)(cid:2) Introduce informer networks, involving local communities, headmen and chiefs.
(cid:1)(cid:2) These should be complimented by systems of bonuses or incentives to support law-
enforcement.
Promote Development of Economic Infrastructure
The following interventions are suggested under the development of economic
infrastructure:
(cid:1)(cid:2) Improve feeder roads. The improvements would include grading, making side drains,
and putting gravel in all agricultural strategic roads. Such activities need to be
community based where manual labour ought to be employed. The use of manual
labour would create employment opportunities to the local people.
(cid:1)(cid:2) Identify and develop areas with already high concentrations of human settlements as
development centres, and
(cid:1)(cid:2) Provide market facilities in these places together with other social services.
Food Self Sufficiency and Food Security
Current agricultural practices are inadequate to realise good productivity. Furthermore,
some of them result into land-use conflicts and land degradation. To achieve food
security, a number of agricultural interventions need to be implemented and supported.
The following interventions are proposed:
(cid:1)(cid:2) Promotion of soil fertility and conservation measures. Such measures should
emphasise on biological and physical ones rather than chemical ones.
(cid:1)(cid:2) Enhancement of crop diversification.
(cid:1)(cid:2) Effecting a seed multiplication programme in the target areas.
(cid:1)(cid:2) Strengthening of the existing agricultural extension services and mobilisation of local
farmers into cohesive farmers groups.
(cid:1)(cid:2) Improving overall farm management. The introduction of alternative sources of
draught power such as donkeys need to be stimulated and propagated. Donkeys are
better than oxen because of their resistance to trypanosomosis, especially in the valley
areas.
51

--- Page 68 ---
(cid:1)(cid:2) Enhancing agricultural production through promotion of small-scale irrigation
schemes which will entail the following:
(cid:1)(cid:2)Feasibility studies for dam construction
(cid:1)(cid:2)Rehabilitation of weirs and canals
(cid:1)(cid:2)Training of farmers in maintenance of the dams and weirs
(cid:1)(cid:2)Training of farmers on basic maintenance and management of fish ponds through
exchange visits and mobile courses
(cid:1)(cid:2) Boost overall agricultural development through development and promotion of
drought tolerant crop varieties for both local consumption and marketing, including:
(cid:1)(cid:2)promotion of women activities,
(cid:1)(cid:2)use of appropriate fertilisers, and
(cid:1)(cid:2)development of pricing mechanisms of agricultural commodities, as well as,
market conditions.
(cid:1)(cid:2) Promote improved Livestock Production:
(cid:1)(cid:2)Creation of pastoral network through grassroot organisations for the exchange of
experiences,
(cid:1)(cid:2)Provision of subsides to pastoralists,
(cid:1)(cid:2)Promotion of diversification of resource-base,
(cid:1)(cid:2)Development and maintenance of water points as well as spacing of boreholes,
(cid:1)(cid:2)Re-seeding of rangelands for forage and pasture development,
(cid:1)(cid:2)Provision of veterinary services,
(cid:1)(cid:2)Rotational grazing on rangelands, and
(cid:1)(cid:2)Fire control and management of rangelands to improve the quality of pasture.
Human Settlement Management
The following programme interventions are proposed:
(cid:1)(cid:2) Prepare and implement general-purpose regional land-use and development plans.
These shall require assessment and provision of information on resource potentials,
land capabilities, conservation and development needs which should result into land
zonations thus categorising the land according to its potentials and limitations.
(cid:1)(cid:2) Within the broad land zonations and for development to be sustainable programmes
will promote land management and conservation practices together with human
livelihood programmes,
(cid:1)(cid:2) Develop land-use plans together with the local populations and local leadership in a
participatory manner to ensure their implementation,
(cid:1)(cid:2) Promote and provide family planning programmes and control human population
increase in certain areas identified that are marginally suited for settlement and
agriculture. Under this intervention, efforts should be made to identify development
zones where people need to be attracted through development services, for example,
feeder roads to facilitate agricultural production and marketing, provision and
improvement of community social services, such as schools, clinics and many others
52

--- Page 69 ---
Legal and Policy Reviews
The following policy and legislative intervention measures are suggested:
(cid:1)(cid:2) Formulate a policy on measures to combat desertification and mitigate the effects of
drought,
(cid:1)(cid:2) Formulate a coherent and consolidated policy on environmental matters,
(cid:1)(cid:2) Formulate subsidiary legislation to allow/permit all sectors to operate as one inter-
sectoral organ, at the district level. These structures should be replicated at lower
levels, for example, chiefdom and village levels,
(cid:1)(cid:2) Revise principal Acts to facilitate raising levels of penalties through subsidiary
legislation for offences regarding resource-use. The present penalties are too low to
deter illegal exploitation of the resource-use,
(cid:1)(cid:2) Revise principal Acts to enable communities manage their natural resources through
community committees. The Acts should allow communities to police their by laws
by using community scouts. The community committees should work in collaboration
with the District Councils Natural Resources Committees.
(cid:1)(cid:2) Review the land tenure system to rationalise and encourage proprietorship/ ownership
and user-rights to promote sustainable utilisation of resources, and
(cid:1)(cid:2) Revise principal Acts to enable local communities to benefit from the management of
their natural resources.
4.5 Logical Framework and the Action Plan
For the NAP to have a meaningful impact, adequate time and resources are required for its
implementation. A period of 5 years is proposed to implement the NAP beginning in 2003.
However, possibilities of extension depending on performance should also be taken into
consideration.
To logically measure the impact of the NAP over this proposed period, an action plan is
outlined and is based on the Logical Framework Approach (LFA). The approach shows, in
matrix tables, the vision, objectives/ outputs, interventions/ activities, performance
indicators, means of verification, assumptions, key players and time frame, as illustrated in
Appendix III. The resources required to implement the NAP are estimated for the entire
programme implementation period to be US$26,640,000.00 as illustrated in Table 4
below.
It has been assumed that all the twelve identified programme areas of Interventions in the
NAP will require to be funded under the Project Activities proposed in the Table below.
However, this outline is only a programme preparatory framework that needs to be
improved upon and detailed through elaboration of programme implementation
documents, implementation schedules and annual work plans.
53

--- Page 70 ---
However, the plan presented is a useful guide for checking progress during the
implementation phase of the NAP. This could be done through examining the various
parameters in the matrices, for instance, progress made on implementing the various
activities, constraints faced, responsible persons / institutions and measures taken to
achieve the objectives of the various programmes.
54

--- Page 71 ---
noitatnemelpmI
PAN
rof
setamitsE
tegduB
:4
elbaT
)$SU
ni
sdnuF
(
fo
%
slatoT
seitivitcA
tcejorP
latoT
RAEY
5
4
3
2
1
0.31
000,004,3
000,009
000,008
000,006
000,006
000,005
troppuS
lacinhceT
tcejorP
)stcejorP-orciM(
3.7
000,059,1
000,005
000,004
000,003
000,052
000,002
ssenerawA
noitacudE/gniniarT
noitaerc
0.7
000,057,1
000,005
000,004
000,053
000,003
000,002
sranimeS
dna
spohskroW
0.5
000,043,1
000,073
000,043
000,082
000,002
000,051
troppus
tcejorP
laiceps
s’nemoW
0.8
000,058,1
000,004
000,004
000,004
000,053
000,003
noitanidro-oC
tcejorP
lanoitaN
tnemeganaM
dna
2.6
000,056,1
000,005
000,053
000,053
000,003
000,051
/seidutS
,sweiveR
,snoitacilbuP
0.72
000,002,7
000,000,3
000,000,2
000,002,1
000,000,1
-
seicnatlusnoC
0.12
000,005,5
000,005,3
000,000,2
000,005,1
000,005
000,001
tnempoleveD
larutcurtsarfnI
troppus
5.5
000,002,1
000,001
000,001
000,004
000,004
000,002
tnempoleveD
lanoitutitsnI
troppus
tnempiuqE
001
000,046,62
000,077,8
000,097,6
000,083,5
000,009,3
000,008,1
LATOT
75

--- Page 72 ---
CHAPTER FIVE: IMPLEMENTATION AND CO-ORDINATION ARRANGEMENTS
5.1 Institutional Flow Chart
There is need to put in place an effective institutional mechanism that will oversee and
supervise the operations of the NAP. In Zambia, the institutional arrangement on the
implementation of the NAP is shown below:
Figure 8: Institutional Flow Chart
National Coordination Committee
on Desertification
(meet quarterly)
Terms of Reference
Membership (cid:1)(cid:2)Provide policy guidance
(cid:1)(cid:2) MTENR (PS as Chair) on matters of Land
(cid:1)(cid:2) MoFNP (PS) Degradation.
(cid:1)(cid:2) MACO (PS) (cid:1)(cid:2)Facilitate resource
(cid:1)(cid:2) MCT (PS) mobilisation, approve
(cid:1)(cid:2) MEWD (PS) budget and work
(cid:1)(cid:2) ML (PS) programmes for NAP
(cid:1)(cid:2) MCDSS (PS) implementation.
(cid:1)(cid:2) MoLGH (PS) (cid:1)(cid:2)Review progress on NAP
(cid:1)(cid:2) MIB (PS) implementation.
(cid:1)(cid:2) Donor Community (cid:1)(cid:2)Report and liaise
Facilitator regularly with
(cid:1)(cid:2) UNZA cooperating partners and
(cid:1)(cid:2) NGO. the Convention on the
(cid:1)(cid:2) Private sector implementation of the
representative
NAP.
(cid:1)(cid:2) NISIR
(cid:1)(cid:2) Representative of
Traditional Leadership
National Technical Committee
on Desertification & Drought
(meet quarterly)
Membership
(cid:1)(cid:2) MTENR (Chair) Terms of Reference
(cid:1)(cid:2) MoFNP (cid:1)(cid:2) Provide technical guidance
(cid:1)(cid:2) MACO on matters of desertification
and drought
(cid:1)(cid:2) MCT
(cid:1)(cid:2) MEWD (cid:1)(cid:2) Undertake assessments of the
(cid:1)(cid:2) ML problems of desertification,
to identify location and
(cid:1)(cid:2) MCDSS
programmes for intervention.
(cid:1)(cid:2) MLGH
(cid:1)(cid:2) UNZA
(cid:1)(cid:2) NISIR
58

--- Page 73 ---
Provincial Development
Coordination Committee
Membership Terms of Reference
(cid:1)(cid:2) MTENR (cid:1)(cid:2) Assist in the coordination
(cid:1)(cid:2) MoFNP and implementation of
(cid:1)(cid:2) MACO identified interventions on
(cid:1)(cid:2) MCT desertification and drought
(cid:1)(cid:2) MEWD
(cid:1)(cid:2) ML
(cid:1)(cid:2) MCDSS
(cid:1)(cid:2) MLGH
(cid:1)(cid:2) MIB
(cid:1)(cid:2) NGO.
(cid:1)(cid:2) Private sector
representative
(cid:1)(cid:2) Representative of
Traditional Leadership
District Development Coordination
Committee
Membership
(cid:1)(cid:2)Government ministries (cid:1)(cid:2) Serve as secretariat to the
(cid:1)(cid:2)NGOs/CBOs Royal Foundation
(cid:1)(cid:2)Local communities Establishment and CBOs
(cid:1)(cid:2)Traditional Institutions (cid:1)(cid:2) Coordinate
(cid:1)(cid:2)Religious Organizations implementation of NAP
(cid:1)(cid:2)Private Sector at District Level
Royal Foundation
Establishment/NGOs/CBOs coordination
(cid:1)(cid:2) Coordinate implementation
(cid:1)(cid:2) Traditional leadership
of NAP at community level
59

--- Page 74 ---
The National Co-ordination Committee on Desertification and Drought
(NCCD)
The National Co-ordination Committee on Desertification and Drought (NCCD), shall be
a sub-committee of the already existing National Committee on Environment. This
committee shall be co-ordinated by the MTENR being the supreme body on
environmental issues in Zambia.
The present National Steering Committee comprising 21 members is too large for a
meaningful and effective way of resolving issues. The NCCD should be composed of
fifteen (15) permanent members as clearly outlined in the Flow Chart. To give it legal
powers and backing, the NCCD should be established by subsidiary legislation.
National Technical Committee on Desertification and Drought (NTCDD)
The National Technical Committee shall comprise of 11 members and will be coordinated
by MTENR. This committee shall give technical guidance to NCCD. The Terms of
Reference of this Committee have been outlined in the Flow Chart.
The Programme Management Unit (PMU)
To service the various committees, co-ordinate their operations and oversee the overall
implementation of NAP, a separate Programme Management Unit (PMU) is proposed to
be established within the MTENR. It is proposed that a Programme Coordinator of the
NAP be appointed, employed or seconded. The Co-ordinator shall need to be supported
by a small number of administrative and professional staff.
This means that the current National Focal Point (NFP) in the MTENR needs to be
expanded and strengthened to ensure that these functions are carried out. Depending on
need, these may be supported by short-term technical assistance. To manage and co-
ordinate the programmes at lower levels, the PMU, need to strengthen and work through
the Provincial and District Development Co-ordination Committees and their sub-
committees on environment and natural resources, emphasising on desertification matters.
It is noted that through the DMMU, such sub-committees do already exist. The
Programme Co-ordinator of NAP should, work closely therefore with DMMU, assess
synergies and work out areas for collaboration that need support to foster anti-
desertification and drought mitigation programmes. Appointment of NAP co-ordinators
at these levels is imperative, in order to facilitate local level projects identification,
formulation and implementation. The PMU will be the key NAP co-ordinating agency in
Zambia.
60

--- Page 75 ---
Figure 9: Flow Chart of the Relationship between PMU and other Committees
NCCD Terms of Reference
(cid:1)(cid:2) Secretariat to all the committees
(cid:1)(cid:2) Prepare budgets and work
programmes for NAP
implementation
NTCDD
(cid:1)(cid:2) Coordinate activities of NAP
implementation
(cid:1)(cid:2) Establish and supervise
committees at lower levels
PMU (cid:1)(cid:2) Liaise closely with all
PDCC stakeholders
(cid:1)(cid:2) Prepare project proposals for
funding NAP activities
(cid:1)(cid:2) Act as National Focal Point to
the UNCCD
(cid:1)(cid:2) Work closely with National
DDCC Focal Points for other
Conventions that have synergies
with NAP
(cid:1)(cid:2) Prepare progress reports
(cid:1)(cid:2) Manage the National
Desertification Fund
(cid:1)(cid:2) Prepare Cabinet Memos on
Royal foundation quarterly basis
establishment
PDCC, DDCC and Royal Foundation Establishment
The PDCC, DDCC and Royal Foundation Establishment shall work in collaboration when
implementing the NAP at provincial, district and community levels.
National Stakeholders Participation
Each of the identified stakeholder groups has specific roles to play in the NAP process as
described by Mweene (1998) in Table 5 below.
Although there could be some overlaps in the potential roles that the stakeholders may play,
the NAP should endeavour to allocate each group with the role in which they have a
comparative advantage. In order for the Action Plan to be implemented successfully, it is
important that the NAP process take into consideration issues of strengthening the capacity
of the identified stakeholders according to their specific needs. An overall needs assessment
need to be undertaken in this area for purposes of NAP intervention.
61

--- Page 76 ---
Table 5: Identified Stakeholder Groups and their roles in the NAP process
NAME OF DESCRIPTION POSSIBLE ROLE
STAKEHOLDER
Internal stakeholders Small-scale or commercial (cid:1)(cid:2) Useful in problem diagnosis
Local communities stakeholders living in the (cid:1)(cid:2) Provision of solutions to the problems
affected areas (cid:1)(cid:2) Vast experience in indigenous technologies
(cid:1)(cid:2) Implementers of projects/programmes
Government This includes the various (cid:1)(cid:2)Coordinator of NAP
ministries and departments of (cid:1)(cid:2)Assigns responsibilities to stakeholders
the Government (cid:1)(cid:2)Provides enabling environment
(cid:1)(cid:2)Ensures the obligations under CCD are met
(cid:1)(cid:2)Financial mobilisation
(cid:1)(cid:2)Local people and donor mobilisation
(cid:1)(cid:2)Monitoring and evaluation
Local Authorities Both Rural and Urban (cid:1)(cid:2) By-law formulation
districts are included (cid:1)(cid:2) Oversee NAP implementation at district level
(cid:1)(cid:2) Coordinate development issues at district
level
NGOs/CBOs Locally and internationally (cid:1)(cid:2) Promote popular participation
based NGOs and CBOs (cid:1)(cid:2) Complement government efforts
involved in environmental, (cid:1)(cid:2) Mobilise financial resources
developmental and other (cid:1)(cid:2) Capacity building
social activities in Zambia (cid:1)(cid:2) Awareness raising
(cid:1)(cid:2) Project implementation
(cid:1)(cid:2) Monitoring and evaluation
Academia Includes research institutions, (cid:1)(cid:2) Research
technical colleges and (cid:1)(cid:2) Training
universities (cid:1)(cid:2) Technology development
Private Sector The business and industry (cid:1)(cid:2) Employment creation
community (cid:1)(cid:2) Financing NAP activities
(cid:1)(cid:2) Technology Development
(cid:1)(cid:2) Financing Research
Media Print and Electronic (cid:1)(cid:2) Education
(cid:1)(cid:2) Awareness raising
Traditional institutions Chiefs and Headmen (cid:1)(cid:2) Oversee the NAP implementation at
community level
(cid:1)(cid:2) Awareness raising
Religious organisation The churches (cid:1)(cid:2) Awareness raising
(cid:1)(cid:2) Community mobilisation
External stakeholders AID organisations and the (cid:1)(cid:2) Provide financial resources
Donors/international donor community (cid:1)(cid:2) Provide technical assistance
organisations (cid:1)(cid:2) Mobilise resources
It must, however, be recognised that there are potential areas of conflict among the
stakeholders, which should be guarded against in the NAP. These areas include those on
62

--- Page 77 ---
policies, fiscal resources management, different agendas, relationships, co-ordination and
perception of issues.
The allocation of roles to stakeholders could perhaps address this potential problem, and
this probably will foster ownership of the NAP by all stakeholders and ensure its successful
implementation. The targeting of awareness and consultative programmes on the identified
NAP may help resolve this problem.
The media, in particular, is important for this purpose and should be utilised effectively to
create awareness and disseminate all information on the NAP process and implementation
of the Convention.
NGOs / CBOs CO-ORDINATION
While the importance of the roles of NGOs and CBOs as major stakeholders is well covered
above, this section elaborates on the co-ordination process of the NGOs that is required for
the implementation of NAP. An inventory of NGOs and CBOs (ZAW, 1998) showed that
there were over 120 of such organisations operating in Zambia (Ibid). Although the list of
these organisations could have been exhaustive at the time, there is need for on-going and
continuous updating of the list considering that there are new NGOs being formed all the
time.
Despite this long list and some of the NGOs having participated in various CCD awareness
workshops, the co-ordination framework with regard to issues on desertification and
drought has been weak both at national and district levels (Imbamba, 1996).
In view of the gaps identified above and the pivotal role NGOs / CBOs play in sensitising
and organising communities, there is need to organise and co-ordinate the NGOs / CBOs
with regard to desertification and drought matters. Against this background, a national
NGOs forum was held in 1998. Furthermore, MTENR through the NCCD established the
National NGO Co-ordinating Committee on Desertification. Zambia Alliance of Women
was appointed as UNCCD National Focal Point (NFP) for NGO activities on
desertification. The NFP has been operational.
The Terms of Reference for the NGOs NFP include the following:
(cid:1)(cid:2) Establish and co-ordinate provincial, district and local level structures and their
activities for the NAP;
(cid:1)(cid:2) Consult with other NGOs/CBOs, traditional leaders and NCCD on a regular basis on all
matters pertaining to desertification;
(cid:1)(cid:2) Undertake assessments of the problems of desertification to identify location and
programmes for intervention;
(cid:1)(cid:2) Facilitate the dissemination of information concerning CCD to the affected populations
and in turn the NGO NFP should pass the experiences and feedback from the
communities to the NCCD;
63

--- Page 78 ---
(cid:1)(cid:2) Facilitate the mobilisation and training of affected populations on the formulation and
implementation of NAP projects and activities;
(cid:1)(cid:2) Strengthen existing information channels to and from affected communities, their CBOs
and civil society through revitalisation of government extension service as well as the
use of the media (radio, print and electronic media);
(cid:1)(cid:2) Lobby to Government and donor community to support community anti-desertification
projects/programmes; and
(cid:1)(cid:2) Lobby to Government to facilitate enactment of legislation regarding participation in
CCD implementation.
Despite the above establishment, similar structures at provincial, district and community
levels do not exist. It is advised that workshops (organised by the NGOs and the MPU), be
held at these levels with a view of creating these structures. At provincial and district level
the sub-committees of the PDCC and DCCC on environment and disaster management (as
is the case with DMMU) should be used.
At the community level, the creation of similar structures as those being created by ZAWA
namely the CRBs, should be investigated with possibilities of improvement and emulation.
The whole process of establishing committees at lower levels should be guided by
principles of accountability, transparency and democracy. Their operations should also be
guided by clear terms of reference supported by a Constitution.
Capacity building action at national, provincial, district, and local levels for the focal points
and their committees is imperative. Areas of concentration should be on leadership,
governance and competence in technical skills and in institutional procedures and systems.
5.2 International Co-operation and Partnership Arrangements
The importance of the international donor community as co-operating partners in the
implementation of NAP is stressed by the Convention. The CCD is the only Convention
that stresses partnership rather than AID. We have identified the cooperating partners as
very important stake-holders in as far as provision of finances and technology transfer to
desertified developing countries are concerned in order to manage the problems of
desertification and drought effectively (Mweene, 1998).
There is a large array of multilateral and bilateral funding agencies represented in Zambia,
some of whom have been appraised in the past by various missions and awareness
workshops on the CCD (Imbamba, 1996). The preparatory team contacted a number of
funding agencies to try and solicit for their commitment to the NAP process. The following
represents the organisations that were contacted in the past and during the preparation
process of the NAP, and indicated commitment to supporting the NAP process as they are
already supporting similar other environmental programmes in Zambia:
(cid:1)(cid:2) World Bank;
(cid:1)(cid:2) FINNIDA;
(cid:1)(cid:2) NORAD;
64

--- Page 79 ---
(cid:1)(cid:2) JICA;
(cid:1)(cid:2) Barclays Bank;
(cid:1)(cid:2) GTZ;
(cid:1)(cid:2) DANIDA;
(cid:1)(cid:2) IUCN;
(cid:1)(cid:2) UN Agencies, particularly WFP, UNDP and FAO; and
(cid:1)(cid:2) SIDA.
The list of the donor community agencies represented in Zambia who are party to the
CCD is, however, longer than what is presented above. This indicates that others could
not have been contacted due to time limitations to express their commitment.
It should also be noted that there was limited awareness on the CCD among the donor
community prior to the First National Forum, such that a number of those that had been
invited to participate in various workshops on the CCD did not attend (Simuunza, pers.
Commun.). The opportunity to seek donor support for the NAP process, therefore, exists
as long as strong contact and effective awareness is made on the part of the donor
community.
NAP project briefs should be prepared and circulated to the donor community for
purposes of programme fundraising and raising awareness. This should be done through
round table meetings/workshops organised by the donor community facilitator as a
desired mechanism/institution for enhancing co-operation and partnership between the
donor community and the Government at all levels.
5.3 Collaboration between NAP, ESP and other programmes contributing to sustainable
development
It has been demonstrated above that the Zambian NEAP and the programme areas for
NAP outlined are very closely linked. It will be important that the implementers of NEAP
and NAP work closely in order to avoid duplication of efforts. The NAP Co-ordinator
should also collaborate very well with other programmes contributing to sustainable
development.
5.4 Other Institutional Measures
The curriculum, at the University of Zambia in the School of Natural Sciences should be
strengthened to include issues on land degradation.
5.5 Funding Sources and Mechanisms
This document is proposing funding mechanisms and arrangements for the
implementation of the NAP.
65

--- Page 80 ---
The Global Mechanism (GM)
Among the various sources, the GM has already been established as the main financing
mechanism for the UNCCD, housed by IFAD in Rome. Its main objective is to promote
activities in terms of resource mobilisation and channelling. The GM is not a financial
institution nor a financial management mechanism. It mobilises resources for the
implementation of UNCCD through the following sources:
(cid:1)(cid:2) A core budget approved by the Conference of Parties (COP) for GM functioning; and
(cid:1)(cid:2) Voluntary contributions from multilateral and bilateral sources which include, IFAD,
World Bank, Switzerland, Norway and prospectively, Denmark, Sweden, the
Netherlands and Japan.
The GM facilitates conditions for other institutions to contribute funding to the
implementation of the UNCCD. To this effect, GM collaborates actively with the
member institutions of its Facilitation Committee, comprising World Bank, UNDP,
IFAD, UNCCD Secretariat, GEF Secretariat, UNEP, FAO and Regional Development
Banks (AsDB, AFDB, IaDB).
The GM also supports NAP formulation and its implementation in affected countries. It
also supports the establishment of the National Desertification Fund (NDF) by affected
countries for the formulation and implementation of their NAP. These funds would enable
financing the elaboration and implementation of Local Area Development Programmes
(LADPs) at local level.
The National Desertification Fund (NDF)
The CCD calls for the establishment of the National Desertification Fund, to act as a pool
centre for financial resources to be drawn from the various sources. The NDF shall be a
basket of funds from donors and other sources including Government for implementation
of NAP activities. The NDF shall allocate and disburse financial resources to those
projects/programmes based on sound and approved desertification projects/programmes
and will be managed by the Programme Management Unit (PMU). With the approval of
the NCCD, the PMU shall prepare annual funding proposals for submission to various co-
operating partners and through the Global Mechanism. These submissions will be within
the framework of approved budgets and work plans. This shall form the basis for
allocation of funds to the NDF and disbursement of funds from NDF to local level
projects/programmes.
The stipulation of clear disbursement guidelines and timing of disbursements of funds is a
necessity. A time limit of 60 days in which to approve and disburse funds is
recommended. The dangers of delays in disbursing funds are known to affect local
communities in the management of their projects due to loss of confidence. Training and
capacity building at local level in drawing up of proposals, requests for funding support
and management of project funds are a pre-requisite to the disbursement process. The role
66

--- Page 81 ---
of NGOs and CBOs in this process is stressed. The NDF shall be used to mobilise NGOs
and CBOs in pursuing the above undertakings.
Though the existence of the ESP, DMMU and FRA are already supporting some anti-
desertification projects and providing mitigation measures against the impact of drought,
the operations of the fund shall rationalise the necessary support in a co-ordinated
manner. Dangers of duplication shall, therefore, be avoided in this way. The PMU-NDF
as a principal agency on matters of desertification and drought, shall co-ordinate all
resources required for mitigating the negative impact of drought and combating
desertification. The NAP Project Co-ordinator needs to work closely with the existing
institutions supporting anti desertification projects/programmes.
Local Area Development Projects (LADPs) and Community Revolving Funds
Development of local level community supported initiatives and strengthening of
community participation in the management of projects is a principal requirement in the
CCD and NAP process. This is also consistent with or complimented by Zambia’s
position in support for the decentralisation of administration and power to local
government and grassroots institutions.
This is based on the understanding that devolution of authority to such levels allows the
concerned parties to have the sense of full responsibility of management and ownership of
the projects/programmes. Thus once external support is withdrawn, with adequate
capacity, these institutions can take full responsibility to run the systems themselves.
Contributions in form of labour and other resources, once the peoples' commitment is
ascertained, are guaranteed towards self-help community projects. There must be a sense
of project ownership by the community. Capacity building of the community members
on matters pertaining to leadership skills, financial and project management, resource
management and land use planning should be ensured. Communities should be
empowered to manage revolving funds. Like at national level (NDF), the community
revolving funds shall be the basis for LADPs including drought relief and land resources
management.
Working out mechanisms to collect and retain revenues from resources-use programmes
and fund raising through the NDF and other donors shall form the core functions of the
revolving funds. Various transparent and accountable sub-committees need to be formed
to run and manage the revolving fund and community programmes. There is need to
review existing structures at the grass roots or local levels that deal with revolving funds.
Where necessary, similar structures should be formed at the local district administration
level to over-see and provide technical guidance to the community institutions.
The role of the NGOs and CBOs in training and capacity building is also emphasised in
this area. The NGOs and CBOs need to be supported and strengthened to meet the above
challenges. In this context, the elaboration of LADPs will facilitate the NAP
implementation at local level.
67

--- Page 82 ---
The Cotonou Agreement (June, 2000)
The UNCCD and ACP Secretariats have facilitated the integration of activities related to
combating desertification into Country Support Strategies (CSS) and substantively into
National Indicative Programmes (NIP). Zambia, like many other developing countries
has been asked to integrate NAP activities into the CSS. The Zambian Government
should exploit this window if chances for the success of the NAP activities are to be
maximised.
Donor Community Facilitator
Currently, UN agencies operating in Zambia have a stake in the UNCCD. These include
UNDP, FAO, WMO, WFP, UNICEF, IFAD and UNESCO. In addition, there are
numerous co-operating bilateral and multilateral agencies from the developed donor
community that are in support of the UNCCD.
It may prove difficult to solicit for funding for the implementation of the NAP, as
different donors could have varying requirements to meet funding obligations.
The Donor Community should be consulted on the appointment of the Donor Community
Facilitator. The functions of the Donor Community Facilitator shall be to:
(cid:1)(cid:2) coordinate and identify potential donors, discuss ways and mechanisms for mobilising
financing resources;
(cid:1)(cid:2) facilitate holding of Donor Forum meetings to discuss, prioritise the NAP and
responsibilities to each potential Donor;
(cid:1)(cid:2) liase with government PMU on the financial needs and any identified funding
problems in the implementation of the NAP;
(cid:1)(cid:2) assist PMU to consolidate funding requirements for the implementation of the NAP
on annual basis of work plans and proposed budget;
(cid:1)(cid:2) keep a profile on each programme financed by each donor for purposes of reviewing
its performance in view of the committed donor input. This shall facilitate
identification of shortfalls, needing further cushioning support, possibly from other
donors.
These terms of reference are tentative and should be reviewed from year to year,
depending on performance.
68

--- Page 83 ---
CHAPTER SIX: CONCLUSION
The NAP Framework Document, which constitutes this report, is an outcome of the consultative
process initiated in 1996, which involved all key stakeholders. The document outlines the
problem of land degradation as one of the serious global problems, hence its Convention
(UNCCD) which came into force after the 1992 Rio Earth Summit.
Zambia also experiences the severe land degradation problems. She ratified the Convention in
1996. As an affected country party, Zambia is required to prepare a NAP as a basis for
implementing the UNCCD. The Zambian NAP has elaborated and documented the causes and
effects of land degradation, as well as, analysed various programmes operating in Zambia which
have a bearing on sustainable development and whose orientation have synergies with NAP.
These are potential areas for NAP collaboration and intervention, since sustainable development
is the main goal of the Convention.
The analysis has culminated in the identification and drawing up of 12 key programme areas for
combating land degradation in Zambia. The vision, purpose, objectives and
interventions/activities are also outlined focusing on the Five Provinces of Region I and II. The
NAP aims to improve and restore productivity of the land resources and promote social economic
development. It also emphasises on community participation and gender.
Institutional structures and funding inputs required for NAP implementation have been
elaborated. The funding sources are also identified. An action plan in a logical framework
manner has been prepared to guide the implementation of NAP.
The NAP is not a detailed project document but a programme framework. It forms the basis for
developing detailed projects/programmes on land degradation and drought. The preparation of
the NAP is also not a finite step, but provides an interactive framework for all stakeholders to
draw-up and implement projects/programmes for combating land degradation. The NAP is
subject to revision depending on circumstances, but this requires consensus of all stakeholders.
69

--- Page 84 ---
List of References
Aongola, L (1999) Implementation of Environmental International Instruments at Domestic
Level. Paper presented at the Workshop on Harmonisation of Environmental Legislation, Lake
Kariba Inns, Siavonga: 31 Aug. to 4 Sept. 1999.
Aongola, L (1999) Environmental Issues: Global and Local. MENR, Lusaka
Astle, W.L (1969) Landscape Classification for Management planning in the Luangwa Valley,
Zambia. Journal of Applied Ecology. Vol.6, no. 2.
Caughley, G (1975) The Elephant Problem in the Luangwa Valley: Vegetation Response to the
effects of Elephant Browsing.
Chabwela, H (1994) Status of Wetlands in Zambia: Management and Conservation Issues. ECZ,
Lusaka.
CHAPOSA (1999) Progress Report. UNZA, Biology Dept., Lusaka.
Chidumayo, E.N. Response of Miombo to Harvesting: Ecology and Management. UNZA.
Lusaka
Chidumayo, E.N. (1988) Hand Book of Miombo Ecology and management. Univ. of Zambia.
Lusaka
Chipeta, G.B (1998) Climate of Zambia. Paper presented at the National Forum on CCD.
MENR, Lusaka.
Chipeta, G.B (2000) Climate Change in Zambia. In prep.
Chipungu, P.M. (1994) State of the Environment Report. MENR. Lusaka.
Chiti, C. (1991) Soil Erosion Hazard in Zambia. Dept of Agric., Lusaka.
Chiti, C. (1989) Soil Conservation and Agroforestry Potential in Zambia. Dept. of Agric.,
Lusaka.
Clayton, Dalal (1985) A geomorphic Legend for Zambia. Soil Survey Unit, Dept of Agric.
Technical Paper No. 15. Lusaka.
CSO (1996) Living Conditions Monitoring Survey. CSO, Lusaka.
CSO (1998) Living Conditions Monitoring Survey. CSO, Lusaka.
CSO (1996) Demographic and Health Survey. CSO/ Min of Health, Lusaka.
CSO (1990) Census of Population, Housing and Agriculture
70

--- Page 85 ---
CSO/UNICEF (1992) A report of a dissemination workshop on pilot survey on drought impact
monitoring system, Lusaka.
Chris, van der meeren (1988) Landscape Classification and Soil Survey of the Lupande GMA.
LIRDP, Chipata
Clayton, Dalal (1984) Lupande Development Workshop: An Integrated Approach to Land-use
Management. NORAD, Lusaka.
Duncan, T. (1996) Prospects for sustainable human development. NCDP/UNICEF/UNDP,
Lusaka
Hachileka (1998) Socio-economic Aspects of Desertification. Paper presented to the Awareness
Workshops in the Five Provinces affected by Desertification on the UNCCD. MENR, Lusaka.
Hanna, S and Munasinghe (1995) Property rights and the environment. The World Bank,
Washington, D.C.
Imbamba, S.K (1996) Mission Report on the Framework for the implementation of the National
Action Programme in Zambia in the Context of the Convention to Combat Desertification. ECA,
Lusaka.
Imboela, L.B. (1996) The Role and Capacity of non-governmental organisations and community
based organisations in the management of the environment in Zambia (The Study Fund, Social
Recovery Project, Lusaka. Serial No. 30)
IUCN (1985) The National Conservation Strategy. Lusaka.
IUCN (1993) The environmental impact of the 1991-92 Drought on Zambia.
Jachmann, H. (1994) 40 years of Hippo population monitoring in the Luangwa Valley
Jachmann, H. and G. Kalyocha (1994) Survey Results for animal censuses in 9 conservation
areas in the Central Luangwa Valley, LIRDP, Chipata.
Kalumba, J. (1997) Human Encroachment in Lower Zambezi National Park: Resolving the
Conflict. EDF/NPWS Project, Lusaka. Larsen, T & F.B. Lungu (1985) Preparation Report for the
Luangwa Integrated Resource Development Project. NORAD, Lusaka.
Kalyocha, G. (1988) The Causes and impact of Flush Flooding In the Luangwa Valley, MEU
Report, LIRDP, Chipata
Kalyocha, G. (1992) A Women Labour Study, LIRDP project area. MEU Report, LIRDP,
Chipata.
71

--- Page 86 ---
Kalyocha, G. (1997) Rehabilitation of Degraded lands and Biodiversity Conservation in Arid
and semi-arid regions of Mozambique, Zambia and Zimbabwe. PDT "B" proposal prepared for
GRZ/UNEP/GEF
Kalyocha, G. (2000) Sustainability of Community based natural resources management
programmes: Lessons from the LIRDP. Paper presented to the IUCN Workshop on Development
of criteria for assessing sustainability of CBNRM programmes in Southern Africa. 16th-17th
March 2000, Harare, Zimbabwe.
Kalyocha, G. (2000) Management of hippo populations in the Luangwa River Stretch. Report
presented to the ZAWA Board
Kalyocha, G. (1998) Bush meat utilisation and trade: Zambia Country Study. Prepared for
TRAFFIC E & S Africa
Kalyocha G. (2000) integrated conservation of Dryland Biodiversity in arid and semi arid areas
of Mozambique, Zambia and Zimbabwe. PDF ’B" Preparation report for
GRZ/UNDP/UNEP/GEF
Kay, G (1971) Maps of the Distribution and Density of African Population in Zambia UNZA,
Institute of Social Research, Lusaka
LIRDP Annual Report 1996. Chipata
MENR (1999) NBSAP. Lusaka
MENR (1998) ZFAP. Lusaka
MENR (1994) NEAP. Lusaka
Muchinda, M.R. (1992) 25 Years of Meteorological Service (1967-1992). Met Dept., Lusaka.
Mukutu, N. (2000) ESP Mid-term Review. MENR, Lusaka.
Mupimpila, C & C.M. Mudenda (1998) Status and Trends of Biodiversity Conservation. IUCN,
Lusaka.
Mweene, A.S. (1998) An inventory of key stakeholders to the NAP for the implementation of the
CCD in Zambia. MENR, Lusaka.
The Post News Paper. April 29, 1998. Lusaka.
Siamwiza, N. M. (1999) The Importance of the Coal Briquette Project in Reducing Deforestation.
ZFAP: Donor Round Table Meeting, Mulungushi Conference Centre, Lusaka 29th June- 2nd July,
1999.
72

--- Page 87 ---
UNCCD (1995) Down to Earth: A simplified guide to the Convention to Combat Desertification,
why it is necessary and what is important and different about it. Geneva
UNCCD (1994) The United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification. Bonn, Germany.
UNDP (1998) Zambia Human Development Report. UNDP, Lusaka.
WMO (1996) Drought: Global Climate System Review. WMO, Geneva.
WMO (1997) Climate, Drought and Desertification. WMO No. 869, Geneva.
The World Bank (1997) Project Implementation Files. Lusaka
The Zambian Farmer. Vol. 4, No. 4, Sept., 2000
Zambia Daily Mail, 28th Jan., 2001. Lusaka.
ZAW (1998) An Inventory of NGOs working in the environment and natural resources sector in
Zambia. Lusaka.
ZAW (1999) NGOs/CBOs Needs Assessment Programme. Lusaka.
73

--- Page 88 ---
Appendix I: Some Environmental Conventions to which Zambia is a Party
Convention (Location, Date/Revised) Acronyms used in
Report
International
Convention on Plant Protection (….1951/revised 1979)
Ramsar Convention on Wetlands of International
Importance especially as a Waterfowl Habitat (Ramsar, RAMSAR
1971/revised 1982)
Convention on the Protection of World Cultural and Natural
Heritage (…. 1972) WCNH
Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species
of Wild Flora and Fauna (Washington, 1973) CITES
Convention on the Law of the Sea (….. 1982)
Convention on the Protection of the Ozone Layer (Vienna,
1995)
Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary
Movement of Hazardous Waste and their Disposal, (Basel,
1989)
Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer MP
(Montreal, 1987)
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change UNFCCC
(New York, 1992)
Convention on Biological Diversity (Rio, 1992) CBD
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in
those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or CCD
Desertification, particularly in Africa, Paris, 1994
Regional/Restricted
Convention on the African Migratory Locust (…. 1962)
African Convention on the Conservation of Nature and
Natural Resources (Algeriers, 1968)
Action Plan for the Environmentally Sound Management of ZACPLAN
the Common Zambezi River System (…. 1987)
Lusaka Agreement on Co-operative Enforcement Operations
Directed at Illegal Trade in Wild Fauna and Flora, Lusaka,
1994
Source: Aongola, 1999
74

--- Page 89 ---
Appendix II: Episodic Climatic Events
Date Episodic Event
1968, June - Lowest screen and ground minimum temperatures of –7.1oC and –
10.7oC respectively, recorded at Sesheke; rime and hoar frost occurrence
on branches of trees there for first time, causing considerable alarm and
despondency; citrus fruits adversely affected.
1972/73 - Rainy season for many areas was poorest in 50 years; drought
caused substantial drop in crop yields and reduction in groundwater
reserves.
1974, July - Maize seriously attacked by cob rots (up to 25% attack in places)
1978, Feb - Flood around Lusaka.
1978, Feb - Heavy rains caused some damage to agricultural crops in many
parts of the country.
1979, Jan - Drought reduced maize production by 25-40%.
1980, Feb - Three-week dry spell, from mid January to mid-February caused
considerable losses to the 1980 maize crop in Southern Province
1981/82 - Below normal rainfall caused reductions in crop production as well
as livestock production. Rainfall deficits ranged from 30 to 50% (Southern
& Western Provinces), 10 to 40% (elsewhere). Luano Valley of Central
Province experienced famine
1982/83 - Frequent dry spells in January, February, & March led to poor
performance of agricultural sector, especially southern half of Zambia.
1983/84 - Drought reduced agricultural yields for the third consecutive season;
worst affected areas were Southern, Central and Western Provinces.
1986/87 - Frequent dry spells between February and March led to
widespread crop failure in Southern Province and affected the total
national maize production.
1989,Jan/Feb - Heavy rains in mid-season caused extensive waterlogging
in crop fields; in Chipata district 60% of the total seasonal rainfall was
received in January alone! Around Lusaka may people whose houses
collapsed were left homeless.
75

--- Page 90 ---
1990, March - Persistent dry spell caused severe moisture stress in the
major growing areas of Southern, Central, Lusaka and Eastern Province.
1991, Jan/Feb - Southern, Central and Lusaka Provinces experienced dry
weather conditions. Marketed maize was only 46% of annual requirement.
1992,Jan/Feb - Worst drought for many years hit at the most critical crop
stage (silking). The President, Mr. F.T.J. Chiluba, declared the whole
Southern Province and sections of Eastern Province, Central Province and
Western Province disaster areas. Later in February the President also
declared the remaining areas of Zambia disaster areas.
1993/94 - Drought and water scarcity problems in the low and
medium rainfall zone.
1994/95 - Continued drought in the low and medium rainfall zone.
1996/97 - High rainfall zone experienced drought, while the low and
medium zone received adequate rainfall.
1997/98 - El Nino had two effects on the Zambian weather; excessive
rains in the northern half and normal to below normal in the southern half
76

--- Page 91 ---
snoitnevretnI
dna
stuptuO
emmargorP
,sevitcejbO
emmargorP
niaM
:xirtaM
emmargorP
:III
xidneppA
emmargorP
niaM
eht
fo
xirtaM
krowemarF
lacigoL
:a
elbaT
snoitpmussA
noitacifireV
fo
snaeM
srotacidnI
ecnamrofreP
yrammuS
evitarraN
laoG
secruoser
laicnaniF
(cid:2)(cid:3)
)s(tropeR
enilesaB
.1
noitadarged
dnaL
.1
dnal
erotser
oT
eht
rof
elbaliava
ylidaer
)s(tropeR
noitaulavE
tcapmI
.2
elbaeganam
ot
decuder
gnisu
yb
ytivitcudorp
eht
fo
noitatnemelpmi
stropeR
ssergorP
.3
slevel
fo
snaem
elbaniatsus
PAN
fo
stcapmi
evitageN
.2
ot
redro
ni
ti
gnivresnoc
dna
srentrap
gnitaroballoC
(cid:2)(cid:3)
ecnerrucco
thguord
retsof
dna
ytrevop
ecuder
-oc
lliw
sredlohekats
rehto
decuder
tnempoleved
elbaniatsus
rieht
teem
dna
etarepo
desab-ecruoseR
.3
snoitagilbo
devorpmi
sdoohilevil
esopruP
secruoser
laicnaniF
(cid:2)(cid:1)
tropeR
yrotnevni
nA
.1
fo
yrotnevni
nA
.1
srotcaf
eht
yfitnedi
oT
gnikatrednu
rof
dedivorp
ot
etubirtnoc
taht
srotcaf
ot
gnitubirtnoc
gnittup
dna
yrotnevni
eht
yb
deifitnedi
noitacifitresed
tup
ot
dna
noitacifitresed
ni
serusaem
lacitcarp
3002
,rebmeceD
lacitcarp
ecalp
ni
ecalp
ecalp
ni
tup
serusaem
fo
#
.2
serusaem
lacitcarP
.2
ot
yrassecen
serusaem
tabmoc
ot
yrassecen
noitacifitresed
tabmoc
etagitim
dna
noitacifitresed
stceffe
eht
etagitim
dna
tup
thguord
fo
stceffe
eht
thguord
fo
4002
dim
yb
ecalp
ni
77

--- Page 92 ---
snoitnevretnI
dna
stuptuO
eht
fo
xirtaM
krowemarF
lacigoL
:b
elbaT
snoitpmussA
fo
snaeM
srotacidnI
ecnamrofreP
seitivitcA/snoitnevretnI
stuptuO
noitacifirev
laicnaniF
(cid:2)(cid:3)
tropeR
tnemssessA
.1
nekatrednu
tnemssessA
enO
.1
ylrae
tnerruc
eht
ssessA
.1
ylraE
.1
ylidaer
secruoser
esnopser
dna
gninraw
ylraE
.2
smetsys
gninraw
dna
gninraw
eht
rof
elbaliava
dna
stropeR
ssergorP
.2
ylevitceffe
gnitarepo
smetsys
ylrae
eht
evorpmI
.2
ssenderaperp
fo
noitatnemelpmi
stropeR
noitaulavE
ytivitca
noitaulavE
.3
esnopser
dna
gninraw
smsinahcem
PAN
eht
tropeR
noitaulavE
.3
nekatrednu
yticapac
dehsilbatse
gnitaroballoC
(cid:2)(cid:3)
tropeR
tnemssessA
.4
taht
seigolodohteM
.4
tnerruc
eht
etaulavE
.3
rehto
dna
srentrap
dna
atad
tcapmI
.5
deriuqer
lla
etaroprocni
dna
seigetarts
lliw
sredlohekats
stropeR
noitaulavE
dessessa
selbairav
rof
seigolodohtem
dna
etarepo-oc
ssenerawa
cilbuP
.6
dna
detcelloc
atad
tcapmI
.5
fo
stcapmi
eht
gnissessa
rieht
teem
,sranimes
dna
slairetam
deterpretni
no
ytilibairav
citamilc
snoitagilbo
sgniteem
,spohskrow
,spohskrow
,sranimes
fo
#
.6
dna
secruoser
larutan
etamilc
lacitiloP
(cid:2)(cid:3)
stroper
yad
dleif
dna
syad
dleif
dna
sgniteem
snamuh
eht
fo
evitroppus
stropeR
ssergorP
.7
detcudnoc
fo
snoitciderp
esilitU
.4
fo
noitatnemelpmi
ssenerawa
cilbuP
.8
snoitalupop
detceffA
.7
na
ni
ytilibairav
citamilc
PAN
,sranimes
dna
slairetam
noitagitim
gnitnemelpmi
eht
etagitim
ot
troffe
sgniteem
,spohskrow
serusaem
yb
thguorD
fo
stceffe
stroper
yad
dleif
dna
no
ssenerawa
daerpsediW
.8
taht
gnirusne
stropeR
ssergorP
.9
smetsys
esu-dnal
elbaniatsus
sehcaer
noitamrofni
seitinummoc
fo
#
.01
seitinummoc
eht
gnoma
,srekam
noisiced
ssergorP
,degagne
smetsys
esu-dnal
elbaniatsuS
.9
detceffa
dna
srennalp
stropeR
yb
desitcarp
gnieb
snoitalupop
ssergorP
laicnaniF
.11
seitinummoc
dna
elbaniatsus
poleveD
.5
stroper
ni
degagne
seitinummoC
.01
semmargorp
etairporppa
tropeR
ssergorP
.21
gnitareneg
emocni
suoirav
dna
sporc
htob
rof
stropeR
lasiarppa
ffatS
.31
seitivitca
kcotsevil
lanoitan
troppus
ot
secruoseR
.11
evitanretla
hsilbatsE
.6
elbaliava
snoitutitsni
troppus
doohilevil
fo
yticapac
esnopser
hgiH
.21
dluoc
taht
stcejorp
snoitutitsni
lanoitan
ni
emocni
edivorp
87

--- Page 93 ---
ecalp
ni
tup
rewopnam
dellikS
.31
saera
enorp
thguord
snoitutitsnI
lanoitaN
ni
lanoitan
troppuS
.7
yb
snoitutitsni/sertnec
etauqeda
meht
gnidivorp
retteb
,secruoser
eht
rof
tnempiuqe
fo
tnemecnahne
gnissecorp
,tnemerucorp
fo
noitanimessid
dna
tuoba
noitamrofni
sretsasid
larutan
laicnaniF
(cid:2)(cid:3)
,stropeR
ssergorP
.1
si emmargorP
noitatseroffA
.1
a
troppus
dna
etomorP
.1
,stseroF
.2
ylidaer
secruoser
stropeR
weiveR
.ecalp
ni
tup
fo
emmargorp
smetsysoce
eht
rof
elbaliava
,stropeR
ssergorP
.2
snoitatnalp
ytinummoC
.2
egalliv
,noitatseroffa
deregnadne
fo
noitatnemelpmi
aideM
,stropeR
weiveR
seitinummoc
dna
dehsilbatse
dna
noitatnalp
seiceps
PAN
eht
stropeR
yrtseroforga
gnisitcarp
ylppus
rof
yrtseroforga
devresnoc
gnitaroballoC
(cid:2)(cid:3)
,stropeR
ssergorP
.3
evitarepo
ecivreS
noisnetxE
.3
,selop
,leuf
doow
fo
rehto
dna
srentrap
aideM
,stropeR
weiveR
slairetam
noisnetxe
dna
dna
reddof
dna
rebmit
lliw
sredlohekats
stropeR
.elbaliava
dna
noitavresnoc
lios
dna
etarepo-oc
slairetam
noisnetxe
gniniatniam
seitinummoC
.4
tnemevorpmi
ytilitref
rieht
teem
,stropeR
ssergorP
.4
dna
seiresrun
nwo
rieht
noisnetxe
fo krow
tceriD
.2
snoitagilbo
aideM
,stropeR
weiveR
stoldoow
dna
gnisinagro
no
etamilc
lacitiloP
(cid:2)(cid:3)
stropeR
rof
emmargorp
gniniarT
.5
ni
seitinummoc
gniniart
eht
fo
evitroppus
slairetam
noisnetxe
-yb
gnitfard
no
seitinummoc
dna
noitaraperp
fo
noitatnemelpmi
,stroper
ssergorP
.5
ecalp
ni
tup
swal
fo
ecnanetniam
PAN
wal-yb
ytinummoC
slairetam
ssenerawa
cilbuP
.6
denwo
ytinummoc
gniniarT
,stnemucod
ot
woh
no
seitinummoc
rof
stoldoow
dna
seiresrun
slairetam
edam
noitatserofed
ecuder
ssenerawa
etomorP
.3
ssenerawa
cilbuP
.6
.elbaliava
niart
dna
noitaerc
slairetam
no
ssenerawa
ytinummoC
.7
tfard
ot
seitinummoc
,stropeR
ssergorP
.7
decnahne
noitatserofed
swal-yb
tnemelpmi
dna
cilbuP
,stropeR
weiveR
emehcs
evitnecnI
.8
esitisnes
ot
redro
ni
slairetam
ssenerawa
detnemelpmi
ecuder
ot
seitinummoc
,stropeR
ssergorP
.8
yb
deviecer
stifeneB
.9
fo
gnittuc
etanimircsidni
stroper
weiveR
gnitnalp
morf
seitinummoc
.seert
97

--- Page 94 ---
,stropeR
ssergorP
.9
seert
dna
ecudortnI
.4
stropeR
weiveR
detagaporp
stnalp
suonegidnI
.01
evitnecni
na
tnemelpmi
stropeR
ssergorP
.01
nekatrednu
tnemssessA
.11
dna
tnalp
ot
emehcs
ydutS
tnemssessA
.11
yb
detceffa
seiceps
weN
.21
seert
tnalper
ssergorP
,tropeR
ro
elbaliava
noitatserofed
noitceles
no
esisahpmE
.5
stropeR
dehsilbup
fo
noitarefilorp
dna
fo
)s(tsil
weN
.21
detcane
noitalsigel
desiveR
.31
suonegidni
etairporppa
,seiceps
deregnadne
seiceps
tnarelot
thguord
weiveR
,tropeR
ssergorP
tnerruc
eht
enimreteD
.6
stropeR
ydutS
,stropeR
dna
stserof
fo
sutats
yraidisbus
weN
.31
.noitatserofed
no
noitalsigel
,seiceps
deregnadne
fo
tsil
eht
weiveR
.7
,stropeR
ssergorP
detceffa
gnieb
seiceps
stropeR
weiveR
dna
noitatserofed
yb
noitadarged
dnal
no
noitalsigel
esiveR
.8
seiceps
deregnadne
edivorp
ot
ylgnidrocca
.noitcetorp
rieht
rof
08

--- Page 95 ---
laicnaniF
(cid:2)(cid:3)
,spaM
nalp
tnemhctaC
.1
snalp
tnemhctac
ytinummoC
.1
dna
noitaraperp
etomorP
.1
retaW.3
ylidaer
secruoser
ssergorP
,stnemucoD
elbaliava
dna
deraperp
fo
noitatnemelpmi
tnemhctac
eht
rof
elbaliava
stroper
weiveR
,stropeR
seitinummoC
fo
#
.2
tnemhctac
ytinummoc
ygrene
dna
fo
noitatnemelpmi
weiver
,stropeR
ssergorP
elbaniatsus
gnitnemelpmi
snalp
itavresnoc
PAN
eht
stropeR
seuqinhcet
rof
seuqinhcet
etomorP
.2
no
gnitaroballoC
(cid:2)(cid:3)
,stropeR
ssergorP
.2
gnitnalper
seitinummoC
fo
#
.3
fo
tnempoleved
eht
rehto
dna
srentrap
stropeR
weiver
saera
dedargeD
ni
dnuorg
dna
ecafrus
lliw
sredlohekats
,stropeR
ssergorP
.3
gnitpoda
era
seitinummoC
.4
,snamuh
rof
retaw
dna
etarepo-oc
stropeR
weiver
sevots
tneiciffe-leuf
gnisu
dna
kcotsevil
dna
erutlucirga
rieht
teem
,stroper
ssergorP
secruos
evitanretla
tsoc-woL
.5
eert
desaercni
etomorP
.3
snoitagilbo
ssaM
,stroper
weiveR
eht
no
elbaliava
era
ygrene
fo
dedarged
ni
gnitnalp
etamilc
lacitiloP
(cid:2)(cid:3)
stroper
aidem
tekram
saera
eht
fo
evitroppus
,stroper
ssergorP
.4
yticirtcele
ciatlov
otohP
.6
fo
esu
decuder
etomorP
.4
fo
noitatnemelpmi
ssaM
,stroper
weiveR
htlaeh
larur
ni
elbaliava
esu
hguorht
leuf
doow
PAN
stroper
aidem
sertnec
serots
tneiciffe-leuf
fo
weiveR
,stroper
ssergorP
eht
tuoba
erawa
si
cilbup
ehT
.7
era
taht
seuqinhcet
gnisu
aidem
ssaM
,stroper
ygrene
tsoc
wol
fo
ytilibaliava
elbatpada
yllarutluc
stroper
secruos
etomorp
dna
poleveD
.5
ssenerawa
cilbuP
.5
noitalsigel
dna
seicilop
weN
.8
evitanretla
tsoc-wol
stropeR
yevrus
,lairetam
hcihw
depoleved
yrtseroF
no
ygrene
fo
secruos
stropeR
ssergorp
secirp
cimonoce
etaroprocni
ciatlov-otohp
etomorP
.6
weN
,noitalsigel
weN
.6
stcudorp
yrtseroF
fo
snoitacilppa
yticirtcele
,tnemucoD
yciloP
,sertnec
htlaeh
larur
rof
,stropeR
ssergorP
dna
ylppus
retaw
stropeR
weiveR
egattoc
dna
,noitagirri seirtsudni
ssenerawa
etomorP
.7
elpoep
lacol
eht
gnoma
rof
seicilop
poleveD
.8
taht
rotces
yrtserof
fo
secirp
peek
dluohs
ta
stcudorp
yrtserof
level
laicremmoc
18

--- Page 96 ---
laicnaniF
(cid:2)(cid:3)
,stropeR
ssergorP.1
noitadargeD
dnaL
.1
hcraeser
fo
egnahcxe
etomorP
.1
noitaroballoC
.4
ylidaer
secruoser
,stropeR
weiveR
lla
ot
elbaliava
noitamrofnI
gninraw
ylrae
,atad
gnikrowteN
dna
eht
rof
elbaliava
slairetam
ssenerawA
sredloh-ekats
noitamrofni
fo
noitatnemelpmi
,stropeR
ssergorP.2
ot
sredloh
ekats
llA
.2
stisiv
egnahcxe
etomorP
.2
PAN
eht
,slairetaM
pohskroW
ni
etapicitrap
ro
ekatrednu
gniniart
etomorP
.3
gnitaroballoC
(cid:2)(cid:3)
stropeR
ssergorP
stisiv
egnahcxe
spohskrow
lanoiger
etomorP
.4
rehto
dna
srentrap
,slairetaM
gniniarT.3
dnaL
no
gniniarT
.3
lliw
sredlohekats
stropeR
ssergorP
srettam
noitadargeD
dna
etarepo-oc
pohskroW.4
denrecnoc
lla
yb
nekatrednu
rieht
teem
ssergorP
,sgnideecorp
spuorg
snoitagilbo
weiveR
,stropeR
dnal
no
spohskroW
lanoigeR
.4
etamilc
lacitiloP
(cid:2)(cid:3)
tropeR
yb
nekatrednu
noitadarged
eht
fo
evitroppus
.spuorg
denrecnoc
lla
fo
noitatnemelpmi
PAN
laicnaniF
(cid:2)(cid:3)
,slairetaM
gniniarT
.1
seitinummoc
dna
lennosreP
.1
ot
gniniart
etauqeda
edivorP
.1
yticapaC.5
ylidaer
secruoser
,stropeR
gniniarT
yletauqeda
deniart
seitinummoc
dna
lennosrep
gnidliuB
eht
rof
elbaliava
,stropeR
ssergorP
seitinummoc
dna
lennosreP
.2
fo
noitatnemelpmi
stropeR
weiveR
semmargorp
rieht
gnitucexe
sdeen
llarevo
tuo-yrraC
.2
PAN
eht
,stropeR
ssergorP
.2
yletauqeda
lla
fo
tnemssessa
gnitaroballoC
(cid:2)(cid:3)
stropeR
weiveR
tnemssessa
sdeeN
.3
sredlohekats
rehto
dna
srentrap
tnemssessA
sdeeN
.3
lla
rof
nekatrednu
lliw
sredlohekats
ssergorP
,stropeR
sredlohekats
eht
ot
troppus
edivorP
.3
dna
etarepo-oc
stropeR
no
gniniart
gnidivorp
CMDR
.4
retsasiD
lanoiger
rieht
teem
noitadargeD
dnaL
.4
dna
noitadarged
dnal
gniniarT
tnemeganaM
snoitagilbo
,tnemucoD
suballyS
yletauqeda
thguorD
)CMDR(
ewbaK
ni
ertneC
etamilc
lacitiloP
(cid:2)(cid:3)
,stropeR
ssergorP
eht
fo
evitroppus
stropeR
weiveR
fo
noitatnemelpmi
PAN
28

--- Page 97 ---
secruoser
laicnaniF
(cid:2)(cid:3)
noisnetxE
.1
emmargorp
hcaer
tuO
.1
hcaertuO
evitceffe
na
edivorP.1
,noisnetxE.6
rof
elbaliava
ylidaer
,slairetaM
fo
#
dna
detnemelpmi
emmargorp
cilbuP
noitatnemelpmi
eht
,stropeR
ssergorP
gniviecer
seitinummoc
ot
sngiapmac
evissam
tcudnoC
.2
dna
ssenerawA
PAN
eht
fo
ssenerawA
noitamrofni
dna
noisnetxe
eht
no
elpoep
eht
etacude
noitamrofnI
gnitaroballoC
(cid:2)(cid:3)
slairetam
no
nekatrednu
sngiapmaC
.2
noitacifitreseD
fo
smelborp
noitanimessiD
rehto
dna
srentrap
noisnetxE
.2
dnal
tabmoc
ot
woh
tnemnrevog
eht
evorpmI
.3
lliw
sredlohekats
,slairetaM
noitadarged
smetsys
gniniart
dna
noisnetxe
teem
dna
etarepo-oc
,stropeR
ssergorP
dna
elba
seitinummoC
.3
dna
ffats
ot
gniniart
edivorP
.4
snoitagilbo
rieht
ssenerawA
gnikatrednu
ni
elbapac
gniniart
lliks
gnidulcni
sremraf
etamilc
lacitiloP
(cid:2)(cid:3)
slairetaM
lortnoc
noitadarged
dnal
egnahcxe
no
troppus
edivorP
.5
eht
fo
evitroppus
noisnetxE
.3
serusaem
noisnetxe
,sremraf
rof
stisiv
fo
noitatnemelpmi
,slairetaM
noisnetxe
tnemnrevoG
.4
ffats
tnemeganam
dna
srekrow
PAN
,stropeR
ssergorP
smetsys
gniniart
dna
ssenerawA
ylevitceffe
gnitarepo
slairetam
sremraF
dna
ffatS
fo
#
.5
,stropeR
ssergorP
.4
gniniart
gnikatrednu
,stropeR
ssergorP
.5
stisiv
egnahcxE
fo
#
.6
dna
noisnetxE
nekatrednu
gniniarT
weiveR
,slairetaM
gniniarT
stropeR
stroper
,stropeR
ssergorP
.6
dna
noisnetxE gniniarT
weiveR
,slairetaM stropeR
,stropeR
ssergorP
.7
tisiV
egnahcxE
weiveR
,stropeR stropeR
38

--- Page 98 ---
no
stnemucoD
.1
no
stnemucoD
.1
rof
srekram
hcneb
edivorP
.1
,tnemssessA.7
secruoser
laicnaniF
(cid:2)(cid:3)
ssergorP
,srotacidni
elbaliava
srotacidnI
noitadarged
dnal
gnissessa
dna
gnirotinoM
rof
elbaliava
ylidaer
weiveR
,stropeR
stroper
tnemssessA
.2
noitadarged
dnal
ssessA
.2
gnitropeR
noitatnemelpmi
eht
stropeR
elbaliava
aibmaZ
ni
smelborp
PAN
eht
fo
tnemssessA
.2
rof
launam
smetsys
AIE
.3
rof
smsinahcem
ecalp
ni
tuP
.3
gnitaroballoC
(cid:2)(cid:3)
ssergorP
,stropeR
elbaliava
PAN
semmargorp
PAN
lla
fo
sAIE
rehto
dna
srentrap
weiveR
,stropeR
dna
gnitropeR
ssergorP
.4
dna
gnirotinom
ecalp
ni
tuP
.4
-oc
lliw
sredlohekats
stropeR
tup
smetsys
gnirotinoM
smsinahcem
gnitroper
teem
dna
etarepo
,stnemucoD
AIE
.3
ecalp
ni
ro
sweiver
rof
smsinahceM
.5
snoitagilbo
rieht
,stropeR
ssergorP
noitaulavE
lanretxE
fo
#
.5
ecalp
ni
tup
snoitaulave
lanretxe
etamilc
lacitiloP
(cid:2)(cid:3)
stropeR
weiveR
nekatrednu
lla
fo
noitapicitrap
etomorP
.6
eht
fo
evitroppus
,stropeR
ssergorP
.4
dna
noitapicitrap
lluF
.6
evoba
eht
ni
sredloh-ekats
fo
noitatnemelpmi
fo setuniM
fo
noitatnemelpmi
PAN
sgniteeM
dnal
no
semmargorp
,stropeR
weiveR
.5
noitadarged
,stropeR
ssergorP
,stropeR
noitaulavE
no
sgnideecorP
tcejorP
,sgniteeM
stropeR
stnemucoD
secruoser
laicnaniF
(cid:2)(cid:3)
dna
ssenerawA
.1
elbaniatsus
devorpmI
.1
refsnart
lacigolonhcet
etomorP
.1
esu
ot
ysaE.8
rof
elbaliava
ylidaer
yevrus
noitpodA
gnieb
seigolonhcet
desaercni
no
esisahpmE
.2
latnemnorivne
noitatnemelpmi
eht
ssergorP
,stropeR
desitcarp
semehcs
evitnecni
dna
ssenerawa
yldneirf
PAN
eht
fo
weiveR
,stropeR
erawa
edam
cilbuP
ehT
.2
troppus
seigolonhcet
gnitaroballoC
(cid:2)(cid:3)
stropeR
dna
devorpmi
fo
gnitsixe
fo
yrotnevni
ekatrednU
.3
gnidulcni
rehto
dna
srentrap
dna
ssenerawA
.2
seigolonhcet
elbaniatsus
secitcarp
lanoitidart
suonegidnI
-oc
lliw
sredlohekats
yevrus
noitpoda
ni
emehcs
evitnecnI
.3
egdelwonK
teem
dna
etarepo
ssergorp
,stroper
seitinummoc
dna
ecalp
snoitagilbo
rieht
weiver
,stroper
stifeneb
gnitteg
etamilc
lacitiloP
(cid:2)(cid:3)
stroper
nekatrednu
seidutS
.4
eht
fo
evitroppus
dna
ssenerawA
.3
fo
noitatnemelpmi
yevrus
noitpoda
PAN
,stroper
,stroper
ssergorP
48

--- Page 99 ---
stroper
weiver
stroper
ydutS
.4
weiver
ssergorp
secruoser
laicnaniF
(cid:2)(cid:3)
stroper
ssergorP
.1
edam
sdaoR
sseccA
fo
#
.1
sdaor
)redeef(
sseccA
evorpmI
.1
doohileviL.9
rof
elbaliava
ylidaer
nalp
esU-dnaL
.2
.devorpmi
ro
htiw
saera
poleved
dna
ytitnedI
.2
tnemevorpmI
noitatnemelpmi
eht
ssergorP
,tnemucod
dna
,snalp esU-dnaL
.2
etilletas
sa
laitnetop
tnempoleved
PAN
eht
fo
weiver
,stropeR
deraperp
spaM noitanoz
sertnec
htworg
etomorP
gnitaroballoC
(cid:2)(cid:3)
stroper
seitilicaf
cimonocE
.3
dna
seitilicaf
tekram
edivorP
.3
fo
tnempoleveD
rehto
dna
srentrap
,stropeR
ssergorP
.3
esu-dnal
ot gnidrocca
secivres
laicos
rehto
cimonocE
-oc
lliw
sredlohekats
stropeR
weiveR
tliub
nalp
eht
fo
tnemrewopme
etatilicaF
.4
erutcurtsarfnI
teem
dna
etarepo
,stcA
lapicnirP
weN
.4
stcA
lapicnirP
ehT
.4
eht
htiw
seitinummoc
lacol
snoitagilbo
rieht
,stropeR
ssergorP
niatnoc
dluohs
emag
eganam
ot
seitilibisnopser
gnitareneg
emocnI
etamilc
lacitiloP
(cid:2)(cid:3)
stropeR
weiveR
rof snoisivorp
secruoser
seitivitca
eht
fo
evitroppus
,stropeR
ssergorP
.5
ytinummoc
gnitareneg
emocni
etomorP
.5
detnemelpmi
fo
noitatnemelpmi
stropeR
weiveR
revo
tnemrewopme
,gnitnuh-irafas
,gnittuc(semehcs
tnemeganaM
emaG
PAN
,stropeR
ssergorP
.6
fo tnemeganam
)serutnev
msiruot
dna
gnihcnar
stropeR
weiveR
secruoser
eht
dna
seitinummoc
eht
rof
stropeR
ssergorP
.7
esab
gnitareneg
emocnI
.5
rotces
etavirp
,tropeR
ssergorP
.8
lacol ni decnahne
eriw
cirtcele
fo
esu
etomorP
.6
,slairetam
gniniarT
seitinummoc
neewteb
stcilfnoc
reted
ot gnicnef
weiveR
,spohskrow
ni
degagne
seitinummoC
.6
slamina
dna
snamuh
stropeR
emocni
suoirav
tnemeganam
no
gniniarT
edivorP
.7
stropeR
ssergorP
.9
seitivitca
gnitareneg
eht
yb
gnicnef
cirtcele
fo
stropeR
ssergorP
.01
detcere
secnef
cirtcelE
.7
ytinummoc
saera tcilfnoc
ni
tnerruc
nehtgnerts
dna
weiveR
.8
gniniart
ytinummoC
.8
rednu
emmargorp
tuocs
egalliv
,stropeR
ssergorP
.11
tnemeganam
no deviecer
EDAMDA
,stroper
weiver
gnicnef
cirtcele
fo
ot
skrow-ten
remrofni
ecudortnI
.9
stroper
remrofnI
gnitnuh
lagelli
reted
,stroper
ssergorP
.21
tuocs EDAMDA
.9
rof
sevitnecni/sesunob
ecudortnI
.01
stropeR
weiveR
gnitarepo
emmargorp
sremrofni
,stropeR
ssergorP
.31
ylreporp
stropeR
weiveR
skrow-teN
remrofnI
.01
nalP
tnemeganaM
.41
dna detnemelpmi
emocnI
rehto
etomorP
.11
tropeR
evitarepo
rof
seitivitcA
gnitareneG
58

--- Page 100 ---
eviecer
sremrofnI
.11
,yrtneprac
,gnipeek-eeb
,elpmaxe
rehto
dna
sesunob
,gnitsevrah
rebmit
elbaniatsus
stifeneb
.gnimraf
hsif
dna
gnitareneg
emocnI
.21
tnemelpmi
dna
eraperP
.21
ni
desaercni
seitivitca
snalp
tnemeganam
seitinummoc
lacol
eht
semocni
dlohesuoH
.31
desaercni
snalP
tnemeganaM
.41
deraperp
secruoser
laicnaniF
(cid:2)(cid:3)
yevrus
noitpodA
.1
gnitpoda
era
sremraF
.1
kcotsevil
devorpmi
etomorP
.1
fles
dooF
.01
rof
elbaliava
ylidaer
ssergorp
,stroper
dnal
egnar
devorpmi
noitcudorp
dna
ycneiciffus
noitatnemelpmi
eht
weiver
,stroper
secitcarp
tnemeganam
dna
ytilitref
lios
etomorP
.2
ytiruces
doof
PAN
eht
fo
stroper
era
seitinummoC
.2
serusaem
noitavresnoc
gnitaroballoC
(cid:2)(cid:3)
yevrus
noitpodA
.2
lios
gnitpoda
noitacifisrevid
porc
ecnahnE
.3
rehto
dna
srentrap
ssergorP
,stropeR
secitcarp
noitavresnoc
noitacilpitlum
dees
a
tnemelpmI
.4
-oc
lliw
sredlohekats
weiveR
,stropeR
era
seitinummoC
.3
emmargorp
teem
dna
etarepo
stropeR
yteirav
ediw
a gniworg
noisnetxe
gnitsixe
eht
nehtgnertS
.5
snoitagilbo
rieht
yevrus
noitpodA
.3
sporc
fo
secivres
etamilc
lacitiloP
(cid:2)(cid:3)
ssergorP
,stropeR
noitacilpitlum
dees
A
.4
mraf
llarevo
evorpmI
.6
eht
fo
evitroppus
weiveR
,stropeR
ecalp
ni
tup
emmargorp
tnemeganam
fo
noitatnemelpmi
stropeR
si
secivres
noisnetxE
.5
noitagirri
elacs
llams
etomorP
.7
PAN
yevrus
noitpodA
.4
evitarepo
semehcs
ssergorP
,stropeR
mraf
devorpmI
.6
porc
tnarelot
thguord
etomorP
.8
weiveR
,stropeR
tnemeganam
seiteirav
stropeR
yb
detpoda
seigolonhcet
yevrus
noitpodA
.5
sremraf
ssergorp
,stropeR
stcejorp
noitagirrI
.7
weiveR
,stropeR
eht
ni
detnemelpmi
stropeR
seitinummoc
yevruS
noitpodA
.6
sporc
tnarelot
thguorD
.8
ssergorP
,stropeR
nworg
weiveR
,stropeR stropeR
68

--- Page 101 ---
yevrus
noitpodA
.7
ssergorP
,stropeR
weiveR
,stropeR stropeR
yevruS
noitpodA
.8
ssergorp
,stropeR
weiveR
,stropeR stropeR
secruoser
laicnaniF
(cid:2)(cid:3)
,stropeR
ssergorP
.1
snalp
esu-dnal
lanoigeR
.1
lanoiger
tnemelpmi
dna
eraperP
.1
namuH
.11
rof
elbaliava
ylidaer
nalP
esU-dnal
deraperp
hguorht
snalp
esu-dnal
tnemeltteS
noitatnemelpmi
eht
tnemucoD
snalp
esu-dnal
lanoigeR
.2
lacol
fo
tnemevlovni
tnemeganaM
PAN
eht
fo
nalp
esu-dnaL
.2
lacol
yb
detnemelpmi
seitinummoc
gnitaroballoC
(cid:2)(cid:3)
ssergorP
,tnemucod
seitinummoc
dnal
elbaniatsus
etomorP
.2
rehto
dna
srentrap
stropeR
dna
erawa
seitinummoC
.3
secitcarp
tnemeganam
-oc
lliw
sredlohekats
noitpoda
ro
edutittA
.3
gnitnemelpmi
ylimaf
edivorp
dna
etomorP
.3
teem
dna
etarepo
,stropeR
yevrus
dnal
elbaniatsus
semmargorp
gninnalp
snoitagilbo
rieht
,stropeR
weiveR
secitcarp
tnemeganam
tnempoleved
yfitnedI
.4
etamilc
lacitiloP
(cid:2)(cid:3)
stropeR
ssergorP
gnitpoda
seitinummoC
.4
tcartta
ro
tcerid
ot
senoz/sertnec
eht
fo
evitroppus
ro
edutittA
.4
gninnalp
ylimaf
noitalupop
namuh
fo
noitatnemelpmi
yevruS
noitpodA
secitcarp
dna
secivres
noisnetxe
tceriD
.5
PAN
weiveR
,stropeR
fo
erawa
seitinummoC
.5
ot
seitivitca
tnempoleved
rehto
ssergorP
,stropeR
gninnalp
ylimaf
sertnec
tnempoleved
ssenerawA
.stroper
secitcarp
slairetam
senoz
tnempoleveD
.6
ro
edutittA
.5
depoleved
dna
deifitnedi
yevruS
noitpodA
noitalupop
namuH
.7
weiveR
,stropeR
ot
detcartta
ssergorP
,stropeR
sertnec
tnempoleveD
.stropeR
seitivitca
tnempoleveD
.8
ssenerawA
secivres
laicos
dna
slairetaM
ni
elbaliava
nalp
esu-dnaL
.6
tnempoleved
ssergorP
,tnemucod
senoz/sertnec
weiveR
,stropeR stropeR
78

--- Page 102 ---
nalP
esu-dnaL
.7
ssergorP
,tnemucoD
weiveR
,stropeR stropeR
nalp
esu-dnaL
.8
ssergorp
,tnemucoD
weiveR
,stroper
tropeR
,tnemucoD
yciloP
.1
tnemnorivnE
no
yciloP
.1
fo
ssecorp
eht
pu
deepS
.1
yciloP
dna
lageL.21
secruoser
laicnaniF
(cid:2)(cid:3)
,stropeR
ssergorP
dna
detalumrof
dna
tnerehoc
a
gnitalumrof
sweiveR
rof
elbaliava
ylidaer
,stropeR
weiveR
elbaliava
tnemucoD
no
ycilop
detadilosnoc
noitatnemelpmi
eht
ssenerawA
dnal
no
yciloP
cificepS
.2
srettam
latnemnorivne
PAN
eht
fo
slairetam
thguorD
dna
noitadarged
serusaem
no
ycilop
a
etalumroF
.2
gnitaroballoC
(cid:2)(cid:3)
,tnemucoD
yciloP
.2
detalumrof
dna
noitacifitresed
tabmoc
ot
rehto
dna
srentrap
,stroper
ssergorP
noitalsigeL
yraidisbuS
.3
thguord
fo
stceffe
eht
etagitim
-oc
lliw
sredlohekats
,stropeR
weiver
detalumrof
tnemucoD
noitalsigel
yraidisbus
etalumroF
.3
teem
dna
etarepo
ssenerawA
elbaliava
stcA
desiveR
.4
sa
etarepo
ot
srotces
lla
wolla
ot
snoitagilbo
rieht
slairetam
desiver
stcA
lapicnirP
.5
rewol
ta
nagro
larotces-retni
eno
etamilc
lacitiloP
(cid:2)(cid:3)
,tnemucoD
yciloP
.3
niatnoc
dluohs
slevel
eht
fo
evitroppus
,stropeR
ssergorP
swal
tnemrewopme
wolla
ot
seef
lapicnirp
esiveR
.4
fo
noitatnemelpmi
,stropeR
weiveR
dleh
spohskroW
.6
fo
slevel
gnisiar
ni
noisiver
PAN
ssenerawA
seitivitca
ssenerawA
.7
seitlanep
slairetam
dleh
rewopme
ot stca
lapicnirp
esiveR
.5
,tnemucoD
yciloP
.4
dna
desiveR
tcA
sdnaL
.8
larutan
eganam
ot
seitinummoc
,stropeR
ssergorP
swaL
yveL
weN
niatnoc
secruoser
,stropeR
weiveR
dna
secruoser
no
etabed
etatilicaF
.6
ssenerawA
seussi
erunet
dnal
slairetam
timrep
ot
tcA
sdnaL
eht
esiveR
.7
lapicnirP
desiveR
.5
msiruot
esopmi
ot
seitinummoc
,stnemucoD
stcA
saera
rehto
dna
sAMG
ni
seivel
,stropeR
ssergorP
skraP
lanoitaN
edistuo
,stropeR
weiveR
,stropeR
ssenerawA ssenerawA
slairetaM
88

--- Page 103 ---
,stropeR
ssergorP
.6
stropeR
weiveR
ssenerawA
.7
slairetaM
tcA
desiveR
.8
ssergorP
,tnemucoD
weiveR
,stropeR stropeR
98