--- Page 1 ---
NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMME FOR
MALAWI FOR THE UNITED NATIONS
CONVENTION TO COMBAT
DESERTIFICATION

--- Page 2 ---
2

--- Page 3 ---
3
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
ADMARC Agricultural Development and Marketing Corporation
CCD Convention to Combat Desertification
DDF District Development Fund
DDLGA Department of District and Local Government Administration
DEMATT Development of Malawian Traders Trust
DoE Department of Energy
DoF Department of Forestry
DoI Department of Information
EAD Environmental Affairs Department
EIA Environmental Impact Assessment
ENRM Environmental and Natural Resources Management
ESCOM Electricity Supply Commission of Malawi
FINCA Foundation for International Community Assistance
ICRAF International Centre for Research in Agroforestry
IGAs Income Generating Activities
IKS Indigenous Knowledge Systems
MBS Malawi Bureau of Standards
MEDI Malawi Entrepreneurs Development Institute
MEET Malawi Environmental Endowment Trust
MIPA Malawi Investment Promotions Agency
MIRTDC Malawi Industrial Research and Technology Development Centre
MoAI Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation
MoEST Ministry of Education, Science and Technology
MoF Ministry of Finance
MoGYCS Ministry of Gender, Youth and Community Services
MoHP Ministry of Health and Population
MoJ Ministry of Justice
MoLHPPS Ministry of Lands, Housing, Physical Planning and Surveys
MoNREA Ministry of Natural Resources and Environmental Affairs
MoTCI Ministry of Transport, Commerce and Industry
MoWD Ministry of Water Development
NABW National Association of Business Women
NCE National Council for Environment
NDF National Desertification Fund
NEC National Economic Council
NGOs Non-Governmental Organisations
NHBGM National Herbarium and Botanic Gardens of Malawi
NRM Natural Resources Management
OPC-DoSC Office of the President and Cabinet – Department of Statutory
Corporations
PWD Public Works Department
SEDOM Small Enterprise Development Organisation of Malawi
TEVET Technical, Entreprenurial and Vocational Education and Training
UNIMA University of Malawi
WSM Wildlife Society of Malawi

--- Page 4 ---
4
PART I
CONTENTS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I BACKGROUND
II SYMPTOMS OF DESERTIFICATION
III CCD IN THE CONTEXT OF DEVELOPMENT OF THE ENVIRONMENT
REGULATORY AND MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK IN MALAWI
IV PHYSIOGRAPHY AND CLIMATE OF DRYLANDS IN MALAWI
V CAUSES OF ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION AND DESERTIFICATION
IN MALAWI
1. EXTREME POVERTY
2. HIGH POPULATION INCREASE
3. HEAVY RELIANCE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
VI KEY ISSUES THAT EMERGED DURING NATIONAL CONSULTATIONS
1. FOOD INSECURITY
1.1 Challenges to food security
1.1.1 Social and Cultural Challenges
a) Rapid population growth and declining
land holdings
b) Traditional practices
1.1.2 Political challenges
a) Civil unrest
b) Maladministration
1.1.3 Economic Challenges
a) Poverty
b) Macro-economic environment
1.1.4 Natural Factors
2. LACK OF SAFE DRINKING WATER
2.1 Purposes of Water Resources
2.1.1 Domestic Water supplies
2.1.2 Hydro-Power Generation
2.1.3 Navigation
2.1.4 Fisheries
2.1.5 Recreation
2.1.6 Irrigation
2.2 Sources of Drinking Water
2.2.1 Surface sources of water supply
2.2.2 Groundwater sources of water supply
2.3 Causes of Desertification and its Impact on Drinking
Water Supply
2.3.1 Population pressure

--- Page 5 ---
5
2.3.2 Catchment encroachment
2.3.3 Poor land husbandry practices
2.3.4 Agro-chemical use
2.3.5 Institutional and legal constraints
2.3.6 Lack of public awareness
2.4 Effects of Desertification on Drinking water supply
2.4.1 Water scarcity and droughts
2.4.2 Sedimentation (siltation)
2.4.3 Chemical Contamination
2.4.4 Encroachment problems
2.5 Current Efforts in Water Resources Management
2.5.1 Catchment areas protection and rehabilitation
2.5.2 Songwe River Stabilization
2.5.3 Lilongwe Water Board Catchment Protection
2.5.4 Natural Resources Conservation Management and
Support Programme (NATURE)
2.5.5 3000 Boreholes Project
3. OVERDEPENDENCE ON WOODFUEL FOR
ENERGY AND INCOME
3.1 Issues Impinging on the Limited Development and Use of Alternative Energy
Sources
4. DEFORESTATION
4.1 Forests in the Drylands of Malawi
4.2 Livelihoods
5. DECLINING USE OF INDIGENOUS KNOWLEDGE AND TECHNOLOGIES
5.1 The Complexity of Indigenous Knowledge Systems
5.2 Selected Applications of Indigenous Knowledge in Malawi
5.2.1 Domestication of guinea fowls
5.2.2 The Role of the Community in Biodiversity
Conservation
5.2.3 Detailed Knowledge of Biodiversity
5.2.4 Indigenous Technical Knowledge
5.2.5 Traditional Knowledge Concerning Health
5.3 External pressures which disrupt the passing on of traditional values and skills
6. POOR ENVIRONMENT
VII INTERVENTIONS: TOWARDS A NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMME TO
COMBAT DESERTIFICATION
1. Overall Strategy of the National Programme
2. Measures to be Taken in the National Action Programme
3. Goal of CCD
4. ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT
4.0 Overall objective
4.1 Broad Areas of Intervention
4.2 Community Based Interventions
4.2.1 Reduction of high rate of population growth
4.2.2 Reduction of poverty through provision of

--- Page 6 ---
6
alternative sources of income.
4.2.3 Management of Communal Forestry resources
and wood lots.
4.2.4 Soil conservation strategies for crop lands and
adjacent lands
4.2.5 Biodiversity Conservation: Plant and animal
conservation strategies in protected and outside protected areas
established
5. FOOD INSECURITY
5.0 Overall objectives
5.1 Increased levels of soil erosion resulting in barren lands
being left for crop production
5.2 Inappropriate farming practices which result in reduced
crop yields, increased vulnerability to land degradation, and inefficient use of
the land.
5.3 Chronic poverty, with no propensity to invest in land
improvements
5.4 Soil fertility decline, resulting in stunted crop growth
5.5 Adverse weather conditions, resulting in poor crop performance
5.6 High population growth, resulting in high pressure exerted on natural
resources, causing shortage of supplies
5.7 Inadequate access to information, causing limited technology transfer
5.8 Limited policing capabilities by Government, resulting into non-compliance
to lease covenants, and development of a slaughter harvest spirit on the part
of most estate owners
5.9 Declining holding sizes, with inadequate food production
5.10 Weak levels of crop diversification: dependence on one crop for food and cash
(maize and tobacco, respectively)
5.11 Inadequate sources of income generation with the result that natural resources
(trees) have become a major source for generating income
6. WATER RESOURCES MANAGEMENT AND DEVELOPMENT
6.0 Overall Objective
6.1 Strategies to Manage Drinking Water Supplies
7. RENEWABLE ENERGY
7.0 Overall Objective
7.1 Strategic options for mitigating people’s
overdependence on woodfuel
8. DEFORESTATION
8.0 Overall Objectives
8.1 Framework for Solutions
9. INDIGENOUS KNOWLEDGE SYSTEMS AND TECHNOLOGIES
9.0 Overall Objective
9.1 Strategies and actions for Integrating Indigenous Knowledge into Programmes
10. INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS
10.0 Overall Objective
10.1 Expected outputs from this programme (as discussed at the national forum

--- Page 7 ---
7
11. FUNDING ARRANGEMENTS
11.0 Overall Objective
11.1 Expected outputs from this programme (as discussed at the national forum)

--- Page 8 ---
8
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The following individuals wrote position papers from which material in this paper was
obtained:
Mr G.C. Harawa Poor environment
Mr V.A.L. Mkandawire Food insecurity
Ms E. Mbalame Lack of safe drinking water
Mr L.B. Mhango Overdependence on woodfuel for energy and income
Mr L. Sitaubi Deforestation
Dr M.P.K. J. Theu Declining use of indigenous knowledge and technologies
I have also used various UN documents and Leadership for Environment and
Development (LEAD-Southern Africa) papers to provide a wider scope. These have
been duly acknowledged in an uncirculated paper.

--- Page 9 ---
9
ISSUES PAPER FOLLOWING THE NATIONAL FORUM ON THE PLAN OF
ACTION TO COMBAT DESERTIFICATION IN MALAWI
I BACKGROUND
Over 30% of the global area is affected by desertification. In May 1974 the United
Nations General Assembly recommended that the international community undertake
concrete and speedy measures to arrest desertification and assist the economic
development of affected areas. In December 1974 the General Assembly decided to
initiate concerted international effort to combat desertification and, in order to provide
impetus to this end, the United Nations Conference on Desertification (UNCOD), was
held in Nairobi, 29 August to 9 September 1977. The conference established that
desertification was one of the major environmental and natural resource degradation
problems of the globe and that its costs in human, social and economic terms were
extremely high. UNCOD adopted a Plan of Action to Combat Desertification (PACD)
with 28 recommendations. This was followed by three expert studies in 1978, 1980 and
1981 under General Assembly guidance.
In 1989 the General Assembly requested the Secretary-General, in consultation with the
Executive Director of UNEP, to submit to the United Nations Conference on
Environment and Development (UNCED) a report containing relevant expert studies.
The report, released in 1991, concluded that despite the PACD and other efforts, the
problem of land degradation in arid, semi-arid, and dry sub-humid areas had intensified,
although there were “local examples of success”. The UNCED (the so called Earth
Summit) held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, in June 1992, offered an opportunity for world
leaders to consider international laws for managing natural resources and their processes,
in a new, integrated approach to the problem emphasising action to promote sustainable
development at the community level. One of the most significant agreements reached at
Rio was the decision to elaborate an international convention to combat desertification.
This was one of the three conventions, the other two being the UN Convention on
Biological Diversity (CBD) and the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC).
The adoption in Paris on 17 June 1994 of a UN Convention to Combat Desertification,
CCD, in those countries experiencing serious drought and/or desertification,
particularly in Africa represented a major step in the response of the international
community to the problems of drought and desertification. The convention entered into
force on 26th December 1996, 90 days after the 50th ratification was received, and the first
session of Conference of the Parties (COP) was held in October 1997. As of August
1999, there were 159 countries out of 188 United Nations member states which had
ratified the Convention, including all African countries except Somalia. Malawi ratified
the convention in June 1996.
Following on the Rio Earth Summit, and building upon the provisions of Chapter 12 of
Agenda 21, the CCD has many innovative features which codify the most important

--- Page 10 ---
10
lessons learnt from efforts to combat desertification over the last two decades. Among
these is the recognition of the importance of “putting people first” in efforts to reverse
land degradation in areas affected by desertification and/or drought. Consequently, the
CCD places a lot of emphasis on participatory approaches and on “bottom-up” iterative
planning processes. In this regard, it obliges governments and other parties to ensure that
decisions on the design and implementation of anti-desertification and drought mitigation
are taken with the full and effective participation of local populations.
II SYMPTOMS OF DESERTIFICATION
The causes of the various forms of ecological degradation and corresponding socio-
economic disruption stem from a combination of (a) human exploitation that overburdens
the natural carrying capacity of the land resource system, as well as occasional increased
negligence and abandonment of land use to the out-migration of people, (b) the inherent
ecological fragility of the resource system, and (c) adverse climatic conditions, in
particular severe recurrent droughts. Whether the process of desertification or its end
result is considered, its most symptoms include:
• Reduction of yield or crop failure in irrigated or rainfed farmland;
• Reduction of perennial plant cover and biomass produced by rangeland and the
consequent depletion of food availability to livestock;
• Reduction of available woody biomass and the consequent extension of distance to
sources of fuelwood or building material;
• Reduction of available water due to decreasing of river flow or groundwater resources;
• Encroachment of sand that may overwhelm productive land, settlements or transport
and communications systems;
• Increased flooding, sedimentation of water bodies, water and air pollution. Societal
disruption due to deterioration of life-support systems that calls for outside help (relief
aid) or that prompts people to seek haven elsewhere (the phenomenon of
environmental refugees).
III CCD IN THE CONTEXT OF DEVELOPMENT OF THE ENVIRONMENT
REGULATORY AND MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK IN MALAWI
Malawi participated at the UNCED in Rio de Janeiro in June 1992. In response to the
agreements concluded at the Rio Conference, Malawi started developing the National
Environmental Action Plan (NEAP) in late 1992. A NEAP is an in-country, demand-
driven process based on local participation and is intended to provide a framework for
integrating environmental considerations into a nation’s economic and social
development, incorporating a time-bound plan of actions for environmental policy,
institutional and legal reforms, environmental assessments, corrective measures for
ongoing projects, and new environmental investments.
Malawi’s commitment to address its environmental problems was reflected in the
nation’s new constitution adopted in May 1995. Section 13(d) calls upon the State: “To
manage the environment responsibly in order to-preserve the degradation of the
environment; provide a healthy living and working environment for the people of

--- Page 11 ---
11
Malawi; accord full recognition to the rights of future generations by means of
environmental protection and the sustainable development of natural resources; and
conserve and enhance the biological diversity of Malawi.”
The Malawi NEAP, which was prepared using a highly participatory approach involving
Government, the private sector, Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs), the
University of Malawi and traditional leaders, was formally launched in December, 1994.
It describes the environmental situation and outlines a series of action that should be
taken in order to redress the aggravating degradation and bring the utilization of natural
resources within sustainable limits. Nine key environmental issues were identified,
namely: soil erosion, deforestation, water resources depletion and degradation, high
population growth, depletion of fish stocks, threats to biodiversity, human habitat
degradation, climate change, and air pollution. The strategy for addressing each area of
concern included necessary reforms in policy and legislation, and possible new
investment programmes. The following are some of the areas identified in the NEAP and
acted upon:
♦ clearly defining institutional responsibilities and strengthening capacity (in
progress);
♦ formulating Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessments (EIA), (achieved),
and instituting a mechanism for their implementation (in progress);
♦ developing an Environmental Information System (EIS) and a Geographic
Information System (GIS) (in progress);
♦ elaborating and adopting a National Environmental Policy (adopted in 1996);
♦ developing sector policies and strategies: between 1995 and September 1999, the
National Forestry Policy; a Water Resource Management Policy and Strategy; a
National Irrigation Policy; a National Wildlife Policy; and the Agriculture and
Livestock Development Strategy and Action Plan, have been finalized and
adopted, and a Fisheries Policy has been developed in draft form;
♦ elaborating and in 1996 enacting an Environmental Management Act;
♦ Prepared and publishing in 1998 the first State of Environment Report.
The National Environmental Policy (NEP) and all the other policies that have been
adopted since 1996 promote the management of natural resources by the communities.
This has been a move away from the former policies of enforcement by the government.
This augurs well with the Convention to Combat Desertification which promotes
community participation in the Natural Resources management.
To implement the NEAP, the Government embarked in 1994-95 on the preparation of the
Environmental Support Programme (ESP), whose overall objective is to integrate
environmental concerns into the socio-economic development of the country. The ESP is
intended to provide the umbrella or planning framework for the government’s activities
and interventions. The framework includes strategies, policies and priority programmes
to address the environmental problems identified. Although a large number of projects
and programmes were proposed, only those priority areas have been included which are
consistent with the overall frameworks of the ESP and which will contribute to the
achievement of its objectives.

--- Page 12 ---
12
IV PHYSIOGRAPHY AND CLIMATE OF DRYLANDS IN MALAWI
Desertification as defined in Box 1 affects almost three million people (about 30% of
Malawi’s population) who live on 2.8 million hectares of semi-arid and dry sub-humid
dryland areas of the country stretching along the Rift Valley floor. This Rift Valley is an
extension of the Eastern Africa Rift Valley. It is flanked by escarpments with steep
slopes all the way from Karonga district in the north to Nsanje district in the south. In
between lie the districts of Nkhata Bay, Nkhotakota, Salima, Mangochi, Machinga,
Mwanza, Blantyre, and Chikwawa. Also included are the drylands of North Mzimba and
the Phalombe Plain.
Box 1. Desertification
“The current perception of desertification is that it is land degradation in arid, semi-arid
and dry-sub-humid areas resulting mainly from adverse human impact. This perception
sets desertification within a broader frame of the world-wide degradation of land
resources. Land includes soil and water resources, land surface and vegetation or crops.
Degradation implies reduction of resource potential…..
Desertification is often related to the incidence of drought: failure of rainfall or rainfall
less than annual average…[It] is a discrete process of land degradation throughout the
drylands….. All over the world extensive areas of productive land are subject to
ecological degradation. Damage is primarily due to excessive use. Exploitation beyond
carrying capacity of the rangelands, cutting forest trees at rates faster than rates of
regeneration, and over-dosing farmlands with irrigation water or agrochemicals are
examples of unsustainable use. Reduction of plant cover leads to accelerated soil erosion
and other forms of deterioration of the physical, chemical and biological attributes of soil
and of the productive capacity of the land.
In summary, desertification is a form of ecological degradation of the productive land-
and-water systems that is due to a combination of (a) inherent fragility of the systems and
(b) overtaxing exploitation. This is a significant failure in resource management and it
relates to world capabilities to produce food and other basic requirements for the
escalating numbers of mankind.
Desertification like other forms of land degradation can be stopped. There is enough
scientific knowledge and technological means to allow the implementation of
programmes for combating desertification in the field in most instances.”
Source: UNEP 1991, p.7-8
It is not unusual to receive rains in the drylands amounting between 650mm and 800mm
with most of it falling in six weeks, although wetter conditions can occur (Table 1).
The mean annual temperatures are in the region of 25oC. Soils on the slopes are shallow
and stony. In the valley, the soils are generally deep and tend to range from colluvial
sands to makande clays (vertisols). This climatic and edaphic reality supports Acacia
vegetation type with Faidherbia albida (the White or Camel Thorn, msangu), Raphia
farinifera (palms, Chiwale), Adansonia digitata (baobab, mlambe), Sterculia
quinqueloba (msetanyani), and Bauhinia petersiana (mponda) dominating on the valley

--- Page 13 ---
13
floor while the hillslopes tend to have Acacia nilotica, Pterocarpus angolensis
(mlombwa) and Diplorhynchus condylocarpon (thombozi). Afzelia quanzensis
(msambamfumu) dominates the river banks and the gorges.
Table 1. Agro-climatic conditions of the drylands of Malawi
District Length of Growing Annual Rainfall Dry Months
Period (days) (mm)
Karonga 150-225 800 to over 2000 5-8
Mzimba 135-180 600-1200 7-8
Salima 135-165 800-1200 5-6
Mchinji 150-195 800-1200 5-6
Dedza (Lakeshore) 135-150 800-1200 7-8
Phalombe 135-195 800-1200 7-8
Chikwawa 105-150 600-1200 7-8
Nsanje 105-150 600-1200 7-8
Source: Land Resources Appraisal Reports for ADDs
V CAUSES OF ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION AND
DESERTIFICATION IN MALAWI
1. EXTREME POVERTY
Malawi is among the poorest countries in the world with GDP per capita of US$225 in
1993. Almost 60 percent of rural households live below poverty line of US $40 annual
per capita income. This poverty is also reflected in the average social indicators, such as
high illiteracy (50%) and high infant mortality rates, and limited access to basic social
services.
Poverty is also a factor in accelerating environmental degradation since the poor are
usually unable and often unwilling to invest in natural resources management (for
example, soil conservation and fertilizers). Degradation of the natural resources reduces
the productivity of the poor who in fact heavily rely on these resources for their
livelihood, and this makes the poor even poorer. Reduction in poverty will often lead to
improved environmental quality and vice versa.
While there may be any number of opportunities to enact legislation to protect the
environment, inform people on how and why to protect the environment and develop
more efficient, environmentally friendly ways of using the environment’s resources, none
of these are likely to be effective unless poverty is reduced.
Alleviating poverty requires economic development, coupled with more equitable
distribution of wealth and improved standards of living through access to essential
services. Investment policies should provide an enabling environment for people to
participate in the benefits of economic development. Particular emphasis should be

--- Page 14 ---
14
placed on development in the rural areas where the majority of Malawi’s population still
lives.
2. HIGH POPULATION INCREASE
At 9.8 million, Malawi’s population has trebled in the past two decades and it continues
to grow. The population is predominantly rural, constituting about 85 percent of the
total. Of this, 98 percent derive their livelihood primarily from smallholder agriculture,
with 55 percent having less than one hectare of cultivable land an amount inadequate to
meet their food needs.
The major cause of high population growth is the high total fertility rate (TFR), which is
the number of children a woman will give birth to in her lifetime. Malawi’s TFR of 6.7 is
one of the highest in Africa. This high TFR is due to several reasons, which include early
marriage, early age at first pregnancy, relatively short birth intervals, and little knowledge
of and access to modern contraceptive practices.
This increase in population translates directly into extreme pressure on land and other
natural resources. The rapidly growing rural population, of 2.8% growth rate, has simply
expanded into the space available to it. Population densities for areas particularly
affected by desertification are given in Table 2a and their population growth rates are
given in Table 2b. Many farmers are forced to cultivate on steep hillsides and other
marginal lands and in many cases with inadequate soil and water conservation practices.
The marginal areas which some people cultivate depend on high level of management
skills, capital and technical investment which in most cases are difficult to obtain or not
available at all.
The smallholder agriculture is extensive and its productivity is low, and the expansion of
smallholder farming into marginal or unsuitable lands has already had large negative
impacts on increased soil erosion, reduction of surface water supplier and alteration in
lives.
Table 2a. Population Density for 1998, 1987 and 1977
District Population density (Persons Km-2)
1998 1987 1977
Karonga 58 44 32
Nkhata Bay 42 34 26
Nkhotakota 54 37 22
Salima 113 86 60
Mangochi 96 79 48
Machinga 97 80 52

--- Page 15 ---
15
Mwanza 60 53 31
Blantyre 389 198 191
Chikwawa 72 67 41
Nsanje 100 105 56
Table 2b. Annual population growth rates during
1987–1998
District Intercensal annual growth rate %
(1987 – 98)
Karonga 2.5
Nkhata Bay 2.0
Nkhotakota 3.4
Salima 2.5
Mangochi 1.7
Machinga 1.8
Mwanza 1.1
Blantyre 1.6
Phalombe 0.6
Chikwawa 0.8
Nsanje 0.5
3. HEAVY RELIANCE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
The Malawi’s economy heavily relies on the natural resources. About 85% of Malawi’s
population live in the rural areas and derives its main income from agriculture that
contributes about 70% of the GDP. For most rural dwellers, the cultivable land per capita
is less than [one] hectare. When this scarcity of land is coupled with soil degradation and
low levels of inputs and technology, the result is an increasing deficit in food production.
VI KEY ISSUES THAT EMERGED DURING NATIONAL
CONSULTATIONS
The consultations which the National Steering Committee for CCD conducted in all the
26 districts of Malawi in the first half of 1999 revealed the following major areas of
concern:
• Food insecurity

--- Page 16 ---
16
• Lack of safe drinking water
• Overdependence on woodfuel for energy and income
• Deforestation
• Declining use of indigenous knowledge and technologies
• Degraded environment
(cid:1)(cid:2)This general theme of issues has been covered in the above text, in particular
Sections III and V.
1. FOOD INSECURITY
Food security implies availability, accessibility and affordability of sufficient food
supplies of acceptable nutritional standard to all members of the household necessary for
an active and healthy life. Food security has two main requirements: one is assuring the
availability of food and the other is assuring the ability of households to acquire food.
The concept addresses the risks of not meeting the dietary requirements.
Food insecurity is either chronic or transitory. Chronic food insecurity involves
continuous inadequate diet caused by the persistent inability to acquire food by whatever
means, such as, production, buying, bartering, sharing etc. Transitory food insecurity is a
temporary decline in a household’s access to enough food arising from instability in food
prices, food production or household incomes. The following discusses the challenges in
ensuring food security.
1.1 Challenges to Food Security
1.1.1 Social and Cultural Challenges
a) Rapid population growth and declining land holdings
Over the past thirty years or so population growth has almost doubled from 4 million in
1964 to just under 10 million in 1999 on 9.4 million hectares of land area and the size of
land put under agriculture has been increasing at an average of about 1% per year. It has
been estimated that 2,064,600 hectares (21.9% of total land area) were under cultivation
in 1965 when population was about 4 million. Researchers have estimated that the
amount of land under cultivation increased from 2,064,600 hectares to 4,641,350 hectares
(49.2% of total land area) representing an increase of almost 27% over the period 1965 to
1992. Malawi has one of the highest population densities in Africa, with five people to
the hectare of arable land which it has to feed from a single rainfall of only four months,
mostly in a torrent during January and February.
Of the 9.4 million hectares of land area in Malawi, 32% is considered suitable for annual
cultivation. Theoretically it means that from the above statistics about 17% of cultivated
land is on marginal or unsuitable land. This could mean that Malawi has possibly run out
of arable land so the population’s increased requirements for food and cash are being met
by expansion of agriculture into unsuitable land in many areas of the country rather than
by increasing productivity.

--- Page 17 ---
17
Mean holding size has been decreasing over the years due to population growth.
Researchers have reported a per capita smallholder land holding for 1990 to be 1.02 ha
with 83.7% of the population having holdings less than 1.5 ha. A further projection of
0.60 ha is made for the year 2010 when population is expected to be at 11,414,460 at a
growth rate of 3.25%. It is also expected that 96.2% of households will have less than 1.5
ha of land at their disposal.
Assuming an annual per capita requirement of 200 kg of maize, and a land holding of
half a hectare, the garden must produce 2 tonnes of maize per hectare to feed a family of
five. This is more than twice the present yield of 0.8 tonne per hectare. Nationally, the
level of food deficit continued increasing until 1991/92 when the deficit was at its peak
(Table 3). Actually, per capita consumption of maize has declined from around 200
kg/year in the early 1970s to 161 kg/year in 1995. As a result, malnutrition is very high
amongst the rural smallholder farmers with small land holdings, who cannot afford
fertilizer and seed inputs and are also unable to purchase adequate amounts of food due to
lack of cash. It has also been estimated that only 4.8% of households in the country do
not run out of food. This means that 95.2% of households cannot produce enough for
themselves let alone for sale. This has alarming consequences on households’ ability to
sustain themselves. Most of these families are forced to go and sell their labour in form of
casual labour (ganyu). This is done at a time when they are supposed to be engaged in
farming activities in their own gardens to boost their production. These households are
therefore caught in a hunger and poverty trap from which they cannot disentangle
themselves. Researchers have estimated the proportion of smallholders with surplus grain
reserves as representing only 13% of the rural population and 12% of the total
population.
For some time, the country’s food production has stagnated in the face of growing food
demands (Table 3). The stagnation in maize yield in the light of increasing proportions of
area planted to maize can partly be explained by the inability of most smallholder farmers
to access fertilizers and that those who do, do so at very low rates of application. This has
led to depletion of inherent soil fertility over most parts of the country.
Table 3. Estimated maize production and requirements (‘000 tonnes)
Crop Year Production Requirement Surplus/(Deficit)
1980/81 1237 1143 94
1981/82 1244 1211 33
1982/83 1369 1251 118
1983/84 1398 1292 106
1984/85 1355 1334 21
1985/86 1295 1376 (81)
1986/87 1218 1436 (218)
1987/88 1427 1467 (40)
1988/89 1520 1516 4
1989/90 1342 1617 (275)

--- Page 18 ---
18
1990/91 1589 1701 (112)
1991/92 662 1755 (1093)
Source: Christiansen and Southworth, 1988 and National Early Warning System for Food
Security Bulletin, January 1991 (modified).
AIDS/HIV: The AIDS scourge has been with us since 1985 when the first 17 cases were
diagnosed. From 1985 to June 1999, 53 000 have died of AIDS. On average 14% of
adults are HIV positive and the proportion is rising. Close to a million people are already
infected with the virus. AIDS will curtail population growth, but it is estimated that even
in the worst AIDS scenario the population growth rate will slow down to 2.1%. A major
effect of AIDS, apart from causing death of the most productive proportion of the
population, manifests itself in the morbidity of a growing number of energetic people.
This leads to depletion of productive labour force, thus reducing sources of income and
support for many families dependent on such bread winners for food security.
Addressing population issues in relation to food security: Malawi has huge families,
rapid population growth, tiny landholdings, and falling agricultural fertility. Its already
high population density doubles every 28 years and this leads to further fragmentation of
landholdings which are progressively experiencing declining productivity. Thus
malnutrition continues to increase. It has been argued that Malawi has exceeded its
carrying capacity and that the worsening trend must be stopped and perhaps reversed.
Strategies include:
i) Reduce fertility. If every Malawian mother were to have two children only, the
population would still double. Most families have six or seven. The scenario calls for a
serious dialogue on smaller families.
ii) Use of improved technologies to increase food supply and maximize food
utilization. There should be aggressive promotion of agroforestry (with the use of
nitrogen-fixing species), use of manure and hybrid maize; establishing irrigation
programmes; preventing postharvest losses and improving ways of food processing.
iii) Fertiliser supply. Another option, though debatable, is a long term and possibly
indefinite subsidy on imported fertilizer as a matter of necessity.
b) Traditional Practices
Crop Diversification. The main subsistence crops in Malawi are maize, cassava, sweet
potatoes, Irish potatoes, rice, sorghum and wheat in order of their contribution towards
food requirements. As a food crop, maize accounts for about 93% of the population’s
food intake, ranking the highest among the staple foods (Table 4).
Table 4. Staple foods for the different areas
Staple Food Proportion of Locality
population (%)
Maize 93 All upland and dry areas
Cassava 3* Lake Shore

--- Page 19 ---
19
Rice 2* Lake Shore
Sorghum 1* Lower Shire
Millet and other 1* Lower Shire and upland
*Assumed
Efforts towards diversifying to other food crops in addition to maize have been minimal.
Maize continues to occupy more land even in areas where other crops have a comparative
advantage. Each year, maize is taking up more and more of the cultivated land. The
projection for the year 2010 is 1,127,030 ha representing about 66% of cultivated land
and the other food crops only representing 27.3%. Table 5 shows declining maize
production from 1983/84 to 1991/92 season possibly due to weather conditions, low
inputs and a steady decline in soil fertility.
Table 5. Trends in maize production in Malawi
1983/ 1984/ 1985/ 1986/ 1987/ 1988/ 1989/ 1990/ 1991/
84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92
Area 1183 1145 1193 1182 1215 1271 1344 1392 1362
cultivated
‘000 ha
Yield 1182 1184 1095 1017 1174 1188 999 1142 482
Kg/ha
Production 1398 1355 1295 1202 1427 1510 1343 1590 657
‘000 MT
Source: Third Crop Estimates (1992 Price Review)
A major contributing factor to declining soil fertility is soil erosion. Soil erosion also
contributes to siltation of water courses and arable land, flooding of fish breeding
grounds and causing loss of property and lives, development of gullies, disruption of
infrastructure and lowering of water table. The productive potential of the area goes down
due to progressive loss of soil and soil fertility decline. The World Bank in 1992
estimated that between 4 and 11% of yield loss is due to soil loss. Soil erosion also results
in water pollution and an increase in disease incidence and increased water treatment
costs. For a country like Malawi, which is dependent on agriculture, reduced income is a
further negative consequence. Table 6 shows rates of soil loss through water erosion.
Recent (1999) estimates of soil erosion for Karonga actually exceed 50 to 100
tonnes/ha/yr.
Table 6. Soil erosion rates from runoff (tonnes/ha/yr)
District Soil loss rate
Karonga 33
Mzimba 25
Salima 17
Mchinji 17
Dedza 32

--- Page 20 ---
20
Phalombe 32
Chikwawa 18
Nsanje 14
Source: World Bank, 1992
Eating habits: The rigidity presently inherent in the Malawian diet needs to be addressed
with special programmes to achieve diversification to come up with products from other
crops which can compete favourably with traditional foods.
Generalised farming systems: A farmer usually spreads out resources over many farming
activities such as keeping various livestock, as well as cultivating maize, tobacco,
groundnuts etc. Increased agricultural productivity is curtailed because the practices used
are uneconomic and inefficient.
High illiteracy level: 71% of adult women are illiterate. Normally, illiterate people have
a low knowledge of understanding. It is even worse in the case of women who are major
players in attaining food security at the household level. Programs of universal education
and adult literacy schools need to be enhanced by providing adequate infrastructure and
personnel.
Gender imbalance: The African continent has generally shifted much of the burden of
food production on to women. One study showed that while women shouldered 90% of
the domestic work, they also contributed 50% labour when planting, 70% when weeding,
60% when harvesting, 85% during postharvest activities while contributing 50% towards
livestock caring. However, the women are often denied access to agricultural loans and
land title deeds on the one hand and proper research design into important food security
activities they undertake is overlooked on the other hand. Addressing women’s
professional training to take up leadership positions, among a broad range of other
considerations to improve the status of women, would therefore improve food security.
Land Tenure: Malawi’s land tenure can be grouped into four categories namely
customary, public, private and freehold. It has been alleged that absence of legal title to
the land in customary tenure has had adverse impact on the management of land because
of insecurity. This argument has, however, been challenged because once a person has
been allocated a piece of land, the right to use it is permanent and defendable just like
titled rights.
Over the past three decades there has been a phenomenal increase of leasehold estates,
from 111 in 1967 to 30,000 in 1994. This increase in private land is at the expense of
customary land. The more pressure there is on customary land the more possessive
customary land holding should become. This should therefore give people as much
incentive to sustainably use land as those who own private land. However, the way
resources are being managed does not reflect this reality. This is due to several other
problems such as poverty and inadequate access to information on sustainable
development such that the poor are unable to make the critical trade off for the long term
benefits.

--- Page 21 ---
21
Title rights under leaseholds should also have theoretically worked towards proper
conservation of resources but this has only been the case on tea estates in Thyolo and
Mulanje, and not on tobacco estates which occur all over the country. The lease
covenants are not adhered to because estate owners strive for short-term benefits and the
government, which is responsible for policing and bringing the culprits to book, is
financially unable to do so. In addition, the punitive measures meted out are not
dissuasive enough because they are light. The consequences are that leasehold land just
like land under customary tenure has experienced adverse environmental effects whereby
the emphasis on most estates has been on growing of tobacco for commercial gain and
maize to feed tenants without due attention to conservation practices.
Most public lands were set aside as catchment areas, wild life reserves and game parks
and forest reserves. Their status has remained so ever since they we declared except in
very special cases where some parts have been degazetted and given to local
communities. Most of the project area under desertification falls in the customary land
tenure category. Private land is found in patches.
The foregoing shows that the increase in private land has increased pressure on
customary land which is now vulnerable to degradation. There is therefore need to revise
the way land is held in order to provide incentives to maintain the soil fertility for food
production.
1.1.2 Political Challenges
a) Civil unrest
War and civil unrest are a ready recipe for food insecurity. They are avoidable through
solving political differences by dialogue. Only politicians can ensure that there is
political will to do so.
b) Maladministration
There is need to have sufficient analytical capacity which can provide updated and
adequate information on the food security status of various localities at various times.
Such area-specific baseline data should be used for planning purposes to avoid making
inappropriate policies that will not address food insecurity at the household level.
Political appointments which disregard requisite qualifications for positions that demand
such analytical skills can only result in misguided policies that worsen food security.
1.1.3 Economic Challenges
Major constraints that have a bearing on food insecurity stem from the type of macro-
economic policies the government implements; the magnitude of poverty;
unemployment rate; lack of income-generating activities; absence of incentives for food
production; instability of the market prices for agricultural products; unfair trade terms at

--- Page 22 ---
22
international, national and local levels; high cost of foreign exchange which often affects
the capacity to import; increase in budget deficits; and low level of investment in
agriculture.
a) Poverty
This has already been dealt with above as the main cause of environmental degradation.
It is also responsible for the rural-urban migration of the labour force. Typical
characteristics of the rural people deprived of access to necessary tools for food security
as a result of poverty include shortage of cash, landlessness, poor sanitation, poor health
and no access to credit. Strategies to address the welfare of these disadvantaged masses
to bring them out of the poverty trap should include: a) development of micro-enterprises,
and b) access to credit.
b) Macro-economic environment
Malawi’s predicament is commonly seen as an economic one. The macro-economic
environment plays a critical role to ensure food security: the exchange rates, trade
policies, fiscal and monetary policies, inflation rate - they all have an effect. Malawi must
develop the economy so as to generate exports to earn foreign exchange and buy grain on
the world market. However, external debt that she owes must be cancelled because debt
servicing absorbs twice as much money as that spent on social services.
1.1.4 Natural Factors
Preparedness to face natural disasters such as floods, geological hazards (earth quakes,
landslides, etc), strong winds, drought and pests, involves having in place a good Early
Warning System as part of a coordinated effort in a National Disaster Management Plan
that emphasises mitigative actions. In the case of food security, there must be established
strategic grain reserves while irrigation and growing of drought and disease resistant
varieties will ensure food availability.
2. LACK OF SAFE DRINKING WATER
The government has made some considerable effort to provide the rural (making up 85%
of the 9.8 million total population) and urban communities with safe and potable water.
More than 13,000 boreholes have been constructed while there are 63 rural gravity-fed
piped water supply schemes and 55 urban water supply schemes. However, despite these
efforts the coverage of the water services are still very low, hence the majority of the
rural population still draws its water supply from the traditional unprotected sources such
as hand-dug wells, springs or open streams, rivers and lakes.
The situation in urban or semi-urban areas is slightly better than in the rural areas. The 55
urban water supply schemes servicing the population and industries in the urban and
semi-urban areas draw from surface water resources. The five water boards including the

--- Page 23 ---
23
recently established Regional Water Boards are charged with the responsibility of
delivering water supply and providing waterborne sanitation services in Malawi. These
are the Blantyre Water Board (BWB), Lilongwe Water Board (LWB), and three Regional
Water Boards. BWB and LWB are responsible for delivery of water in Blantyre and
Lilongwe, respectively, while the Northern, Central and Southern Region Water Boards
are responsible for delivery of these services in the urban centres in the three respective
regions apart from Blantyre and Lilongwe cities.
Most of the water supply schemes (both urban and rural) in the country obtain their water
supplies directly from the rivers without any storage facilities in form of reservoirs.
These rivers are less reliable during dry months where considerable low flows are
presently experienced. The situation of unreliable dry season flows has been exacerbated
by deforestation and poor land use practices within the catchments. Unfortunately the
strong seasonality of the rainfall, and the considerable variation in total rainfall from year
to year means that the supply of easily available water is limited. This existing problem
is aggravated by the tendency for changes in land use and deforestation which reduces
infiltration, reduces dry season flows and increases the occurrence of floods. The
headwater and marginal land areas have been cleared of vegetation cover particularly
forests and trees. The clearing of vegetation cover has eventually resulted in increased
siltation in rivers and occurrence of floods. Increased population growth has resulted in
cultivation and settlement in marginal lands. In some cases, people have actually
encroached on protected or gazetted lands such as national parks, game or forest reserves,
resulting in increased runoff without sufficiently recharging the groundwater aquifers.
The current deteriorating situation in terms of water resources throughout the country has
become one of the major environmental problems as identified in the National
Environment Action Plan (NEAP) report of 1994.
The Ministry of Water Development and other agencies that deal with water are
concerned with the management of the water resources, the supply of water for human
and animal consumption, industrial use and crop production. Safe water is basic water
and is the essence of life, but can be deadly if contaminated. A safe source of water can
help alleviate some of the water aspects of poverty and give children the chance to grow
up healthy in body and mind. Water is life and so we cannot allow life to die when we
have all the necessary means and ways to sustain it. Population increase and the rapid
expansion of the economy means that a greater demand is being placed on the resources
and very careful planning and development of the resources will be required if future
demands are to be met.
In the face of the rapidly changing environment due to climate change and human
activities, such as farming in marginal areas due to increased population pressure,
construction of roads, buildings, industries and all forms of transport, it is important to
look critically at environmental problems affecting water, and final solutions should be
provided to combat these problems.
2.1 Purposes of Water Resources

--- Page 24 ---
24
There are several categories of use of water in Malawi other than for drinking purposes.
All the uses of water resources are, however, affected by similar problems. Although this
section will concentrate on drinking water supplies in relation to desertification, it is also
important to bear in mind these other uses as discussed below.
2.1.1 Domestic water supplies
More than 65% of Malawi’s population have access to safe drinking water. This
translates into 85% of the urban population and 45% of the rural population. The overall
average is one of the highest in Africa. However, both rural and urban water supply
systems suffer from significant operational problems. It is estimated that currently only
one third of the rural population has access to improved water supplies. Similarly, recent
surveys indicate that the figures for urban areas is in the order of 60-70%.
2.1.2 Hydro-power generation
The hydropower potential is concentrated on the Shire River. Its estimated total capacity
is about 600 MW which would provide nearly 3500 GWh of electrical energy. About
98% of electricity available in Malawi comes from the Shire River alone, with a design
flow of 170 m3/s. Although hydro-electric power generation does not reduce the quantity
of water in rivers, it does create an extremely large demand on the resources in that a very
high minimum flow in the river must be guaranteed
2.1.3 Navigation
Lake Malawi and Shire river both play an extremely important role in the national
communications systems. At present the lake provides the basis for an extremely
effective goods and passenger communication system to many parts of the Northern and
Central regions. Thus the lake services 200,000 passengers and 100,000 tonnes of cargo
annually by ships and boats. However, the sailing and docking of these is vulnerable to
water levels, lake depths and waves. The lower Shire is used for the movement of
produce from the large estates. The future of the lake ports is enhanced by the
development of the Lake Shore road and laterals and the upper Shire will regain
importance in parallel with the development of the Liwonde as an industrial centre and
communications link.
2.1.4 Fisheries
Fish is an important part of the diet in all sections of the community, providing the
essential animal protein (30-70 percent). The fishing industry is important as a source of
cash income and adding to the subsistence economy. It also provides foreign exchange
through the export of aquarium fish. The principal requirements of fisheries are that the
variation in water levels should follow as natural a pattern as possible, and that the
quality of the water should be as high as possible. However, very little water quality data
(nutrient levels, movement and other characteristics) is available from limnological
studies of the lake.

--- Page 25 ---
25
2.1.5 Recreation
Tourism is a major industry, and is placing a significant and growing demand on water
for recreation use. With increasing standards of living the non-tourist demand for water
recreation is to increase.
2.1.6 Irrigation
The greatest sectoral use of water by far is irrigation. There are about 3,000 hectares of
government projects, mostly for rice and sugar production, with total licensed demand of
850 m3/day. More than 20,000 hectares are being irrigated from the rivers, demanding
about 20 m3/s. The copious waters of Lake Malawi have hardly been exploited for
irrigation and conveyance over land to supply the needs of growing urban centres.
2.2 Sources of Drinking Water
Most of the water supply schemes (both urban and rural) in the country obtain their water
supplies directly from surface water resources such as rivers, lakes, springs and
groundwater sources. The sources of drinking water supply are basically grouped into:
2.2.1 Surface sources of water supply
There are many sources of surface water which are used to supply water to people in
villages and town centres. Examples of surface sources of water supply are lakes, rivers,
and springs. Water Supply Projects such as Mpira-Balaka, Dombole, Champhira and
Lilongwe City are deriving their water from surface water sources. Most people in rural
areas obtain their drinking water supply directly from unprotected sources such as lakes,
rivers, springs and groundwater.
The origin of most of the surface sources are forest reserves. These reserves are now
being progressively destroyed because of careless cutting of trees for building, firewood
and other uses. It is clear from the observations made in the river flows that these sources
are dwindling. It has also been observed that the more the trees are cut and the more bare
the ground is exposed, the less the flow. Eventually, if the problem is not checked and
corrective measures taken, there will be no water from the surface sources. Even big
dams and lakes will slowly reduce their capacity.
2.2.2 Groundwater sources of water supply
Malawi has currently over 13,000 boreholes that are used as sources of water for human
consumption in both towns and villages and for irrigation of crops. In some areas people
have hand-dug shallow wells. Recently it has been observed that these wells are drying

--- Page 26 ---
26
up and in some areas boreholes are also drying up due to lowering of groundwater
tables. This is giving more pressure to borehole contractors as they have to drill deeper
than before to reach more water. If human beings are facing this problem, then plants,
especially the shallow rooted ones, are endangered too. If this situation is not checked,
only deep rooted plants will remain. This is rapidly contributing to desertification and is
a very worrisome situation for existence.
2.3 Causes of Desertification and its Impact on Drinking Water Supply
2.3.1 Population pressure
The available resources are not increasing to meet the ever increasing demand from a
fast-growing population. The growing numbers of the large rural population means that
there is a greater demand being placed on the resources and there is need for careful
planning and development of the resources so that water supply is sustained.
2.3.2 Catchment encroachment
Encroachment of protected catchments, through deforestation, human settlement and
cultivation of marginal lands, is an issue of major concern in Malawi today. This
particular type of pressure increasingly being exerted on water resources brings about
declining base flows, deterioration of water quality, reduced groundwater recharge rates,
increased turbidity of water in rivers and reservoirs and increased incidences of flood
disasters.
2.3.3 Poor land husbandry practices
Despite the government efforts to educate farmers or the public on proper land husbandry
practices to conserve both soil and water, people still have not abandoned their traditional
methods of farming. This has led further to water resources degradation. More effective
training programmes are needed.
2.3.4 Agro-chemical use
While the application of agro-chemicals has led to pest control and increased food
production, it has equally contributed towards the degradation of water resources. The
increased deterioration of water quality in most of the water resources which are the
sources of water supply can lead into a major health hazard to people as well as the
livestock. The contamination is very expensive to treat and if undertaken can seriously
affect the financial resources of water providers.
2.3.5 Institutional and legal constraints
The government of Malawi’s policy is to reduce the incidence of water borne diseases
and reduce the time devoted by individuals to water collection. The Water Resources Act

--- Page 27 ---
27
such as the Water Act and other Acts that deal with the use of water as well as its
management have been found to be inadequate in that they do not cover all the relevant
issues related to water resources management, especially in the area of taking positive
measures against offenders and are not keeping pace with the ever changing
environment. The proposed implementation of institutional arrangements or other
strategies mentioned in the current policy have no time frame nor the implementation
plan or targets. The weaknesses and strengths of these institutions should be translated
into policies to ensure that they have the capacity not only to implement the National
Water Resources Management Policies (NWRMP), but also integrated management.
2.3.6 Lack of public awareness
Water resources degradation and depletion have resulted from a number of man’s
activities such as deforestation, poor land husbandry practices, improper disposal of
sewage and industrial waste and effluents. However, there is generally lack of adequate
public awareness or education on these problems.
2.4 Effects of Desertification on Drinking water supply
2.4.1 Water scarcity and droughts
The water resources are becoming inadequate and scarce to meet the demand due to
increases in population and demand for other water uses such as industrial production
and irrigation requirements. Climate change has resulted into increased seasonal
variability in the run-off. This problem has basically arose as a result of droughts, with
the resultant unreliable seasonal flows. The 1991/92 and 1994/95 droughts showed the
vulnerability of water supply schemes which were affected by the variability of seasonal
run-off, since most of the schemes rely on direct run of the river which is then greatly
affected in case of hydrological demand for domestic needs, industrial production, and
irrigation requirements.
There are frequent occurrences of droughts that are initiated by the El Nino and
Southern Oscillation (ENSO) phenomena. These have resulted in declining amounts of
both surface and groundwater resources due to inadequate amounts of rainfall to
replenish water resources.
2.4.2 Sedimentation (siltation)
Clearing of vegetation cover has eventually resulted in increased soil erosion (see Table
6) and runoff resulting into increased siltation in rivers. Silt loads (sedimentation) in
surface runoff from soil erosion lead to significant problems in down stream water
quality, including increased suspended solids and turbidity resulting in high water
treatment costs and water flow problems. Since the majority of the people reside in rural
areas and depend on rivers for water supply, chances of drinking unclean water are very
high.

--- Page 28 ---
28
As shown in the case studies carried out, catchments with high deforestation rates have
faced decreased levels of flow discharge, which in turn have led to increased levels of
turbidity and solids. High sediment loads in the rivers bring about siltation of rivers
(where the gradient is low) and of water reservoirs. The silted river courses and water
reservoirs tend to have reduced capacities and when it rains the banks may overflow,
causing flooding at times as has always been the case in Shire River Valley and its major
tributaries, or the water erodes the bank (in order to accommodate the increased volume
of run-off). The intake point for Nkula Hydro-Electrical power reservoir, for instance, is
frequently dredged for this reason. Such is the case also with many sources of drinking
water supplies countrywide.
2.4.3 Chemical contamination
With the increase in use of marginal land, and cultivation of protected areas, and loss of
soil fertility, use of agrochemicals such as fertilizers, pesticides and insecticides become
inevitable in order to achieve increased productivity. However, runoff of agrochemicals
resulting from poor conservation measures may have a detrimental effect on the quality
of the water of a number of water resources (i.e. rivers, streams, lakes, groundwater
sources etc). The chemicals may result in eutrophication of the water bodies, leading to
increase in growth of the water plants. This threatens fish resource growth and
reproduction. Some poisonous agrochemicals can even cause death of fish in rivers apart
from posing threats to human health through consumption of contaminated fish.
2.4.4 Encroachment problems
Encroachment into marginal or catchment areas has led to flashy runoff that rapidly runs
without sufficiently recharging the groundwater aquifers. Most of the boreholes or
shallow wells are drying up in these areas due to poor groundwater recharge thereby
reducing the water table. It is now common to see rivers from these areas drying up or
experiencing dwindling flow even if it could be in normal years in terms of rainfall.
2.5 Current Efforts in Water Resources Management
2.5.1 Catchment areas protection and rehabilitation
Catchment areas are nowadays increasingly becoming bare with the wanton cutting of
trees and inappropriate agricultural practices. Under the National Water Development
Programme (NWDP), the Ministry of Water Development in collaboration with other
ministries such as Agriculture and Livestock Development, the Forestry Department and
Environmental Affairs Department, with the help of communities, are working hard to
help in protecting the catchments thereby improving the quality and quantity of surface
water sources. At least 15 catchments of the urban and rural water supply schemes are to
receive similar initiatives of community based catchment protection and watershed
management.
2.5.2 Songwe River stabilization

--- Page 29 ---
29
The project is aimed at stabilizing the course of the river and reduce local flooding,
develop agriculture and fisheries, generate hydropower, and fix the international
boundary in the lower reaches of the river before flowing into Lake Malawi. This project
will also help to solve the siltation problem in the river which serves many people as a
source of drinking water.
2.5.3 Lilongwe Water Board Catchment Protection
In 1993, a water resources control order was issued to declare the Lilongwe Water Board
Catchment Area a controlled water area in which certain human activities were being
prohibited within the catchment for the purpose of protecting the water resources under
the Board’s catchment. This project has proved to be effective in that it has helped reduce
the incidence of siltation and chemical contamination of the source of drinking water for
the city. Similar orders are in the planning stages for the rest of the Water Boards.
2.5.4 Natural Resources Conservation Management and Support Programme
(NATURE)
Natural Resources Conservation Management and Support Programme (NATURE) is
funded by USAID in which the government is to undertake review and harmonise the
natural resources management policy, legislation and institutional roles of various
government institutions dealing with the natural resources management. All these
programmes and initiatives have a strong component of water resources management
particularly conservation and protection.
2.5.5 3000 Boreholes project
The Ministry of Water Development is addressing the water supply, sanitation and
management for the rural and semi urban population in a project, started in 1997, of
drilling 3000 boreholes throughout Malawi. This project is sponsored by the Malawi
Government and is aimed at providing safe water to the rural poor especially women and
children who had to walk long distances to fetch water. A community based management
approach is being used so that the communities feel the sense of ownership and are able
to manage the boreholes and its surrounding areas well. At present about 2000 of the
3000 boreholes have been drilled.
3. OVERDEPENDENCE ON WOODFUEL FOR ENERGY AND INCOME
In Malawi, 90% of the population depend on woodfuel as the source of energy. Energy
consumption is dependent on a balance of 93% woodfuel, 3.5% petroleum, 2.3%
electricity, 1% coal and 0.2% other biomass fuels. The massive use of traditional energy
sources is an indication of acute poverty and a rural based economy. This is why
sustainable renewable energy issues have been included in the Poverty Alleviation
Policy Framework as a way of recognizing the extent of the problem in the country.

--- Page 30 ---
30
Well over 30% of the rural population depend on selling wood products for their survival.
About 20% of the wood products are sold as woodfuels. It is estimated that wood
consumption exceeds sustainable supply by 2.37 million cubic metres. Expressed into
deforestation, the deficit translates into net clearing of 50,000 hectares a year. This
situation is aggravated by rapid population growth currently at 2.8%, expansion of the
estate sector, rampant poverty and an underdeveloped renewable energy subsector.
3.1 Issues Impinging on the Limited Development and Use of Alternative Energy
Sources
In the energy sector there are several issues which have been identified as having a
negative impact on the use of alternative sources of energy. Some of these issues are as
follows:
• limited affordable alternative sources of energy to woodfuels;
• limited utilization of some biomass materials of agricultural wastes;
• low efficiency of biomass conversion technologies;
• low efficiency of woodfuel end-use devices;
• unsustainable use of woodfuels and other biomass resources leading to
deforestation and land degradation;
• low access to energy services from other renewables due to:-
(cid:1) high initial capital cost,
(cid:1) lack of appropriate delivery mechanisms and dissemination schemes,
(cid:1) limited information on renewables;
• poor track record of the systems installed so far;
• poor support structures and policies as shown by:
(cid:1) lack of trained technicians/artisans,
(cid:1) lack of incentives/rigid fiscal regimes e.g. no exemption of duty on solar
panels, and
(cid:1) limited numbers of professional in the energy sector;
• limited affordability of electricity and end use of devices;
• low access to electricity due to restrictive distribution policies, high wiring costs
and capital contribution requirements;
• lack of Community Power Producers;
• lack of local manufacturing of end use devices and accessories.
4. DEFORESTATION
The forest estate in Malawi is estimated at 27.6% of the total land area of 94,000
square kilometers. This estate consists of forest resources and protected hillslopes,
national parks and game reserves and customary land forests. Plantations and
woodlots, both state and private, constitute almost 222,000 hectares of which a

--- Page 31 ---
31
quarter are on the Viphya Plateau producing softwood, initially meant for pulp and
paper but now put to timber production. In general, much of the forest estate is in
the north where the population is the smallest and sparsely distributed than in the
other two regions of the country.
Clearing of the forest estate, especially on customary land, has been a function of
developments in other sectors of the economy, especially in agriculture. Between 1972
and 1990 clearing of forests for agricultural expansion and roads construction was at a
rate of 1% annually in the Rift Valley (Table 7).
This change of land use is what is termed as deforestation. We shall examine the extent
of this phenomenon with regards to the ecosystems and livelihoods of the population of
the drylands of the country, and suggest a framework for mitigating it.
Table 7. Changes in forest cover in the Rift Valley Districts (1972-1990)
District District Area Forest Cover Forest Cover (%) Average Annual
(Km2) (Km2) loss of Forest (ha)
1972 1990 1972 1990
Karonga 3,422 2,864 2,351 83.7 68.7 2,850
Nkhata Bay 4,508 2,878 2,632 63.8 58.4 1,367
Nkhotakota 4,282 3,211 2,222 75.0 51.9 5,494
Salima 2,121 596 159 28.1 7.5 2,428
Mangochi 6,750 4,433 2,577 65.7 38.2 10,311
Machinga 6,104 2,233 952 36.6 15.6 7,117
Mwanza 2,310 1,498 710 64.8 30.7 4,378
Blantyre 2,014 919 614 45.6 30.5 1,694
Chikwawa 4,868 2,690 1,619 55.3 33.3 5,950
Nsanje 1,967 987 663 50.2 33.7 1,800
4.1 Forests in the Drylands of Malawi
The drylands of Malawi are predominantly in the Rift Valley Floor, North Mzimba and
the Phalombe Plain. They have been already described in Section IV. Due to high
population growth (Table 2), agricultural development and construction of roads and
other infrastructure, most forests in the valley have been cut down. Nobody knows yet
the type and number of species lost as a result of such deforestation. This may have
contributed to biodiversity `loss.

--- Page 32 ---
32
However, some trees of F. albida and S. quinqueloba are left standing in gardens by the
farmers. The former is a soil-enriching tree, which contributes to the nitrogen budget in
the soil thereby improving crop productivity; the latter is considered a protected tree.
Other trees which dominate home surroundings are Moringa oleifera (cham’mwamba),
Zizyphus mauritiana (masau) and Azadirachta indica (neem).
4.2 Livelihoods
The Rift valley is a stretch of Lake Malawi, Lake Malombe and Shire River. As a result
most people living in the Rift Valley Districts largely depend on fisheries resources for
their livelihoods. There is more exploitation of fish resources in the shallow waters,
especially in the southern tip of Lake Malawi, than in other parts of the lake. As a result
there is overexploitation in Mangochi than in any other Valley District. The deep waters
are said to have adequate stocks of fish, but their exploitation is dependent on improving
the gear which the local people are unable to afford. Unfortunately, the fishing company,
Maldeco, has also not yet invested in these gears. Thus Maldeco is competing with the
local fishermen in exploiting the shallow waters.
Recent growth in the fish industry has in turn stimulated a corresponding demand for
fuelwood and canoes. Due to low wood productivity and limited supply, over-harvesting
of wood on the steep slopes of the escarpments can be seen. The prevailing high
population densities (Table 2a) lead to low landholding of arable land of under 0.5 ha.
The small landholdings coupled with poor agricultural practices lead to poor harvests. In
the hope of improving harvests subsistence farmers encroach into forest areas which are
marginal such as the hillslopes.
Handicrafts including ebony curios, mats and toys made from palm leaves are sold
to tourists and other visitors who come to enjoy the lake. There is a growing
demand for curios and toys on the european markets such as in Germany. Thus
handicrafts are increasingly becoming an important source of employment and
income in Mangochi, Salima and Nkhata Bay districts where holiday resorts have
been developed.
The growing demand for fuelwood and curios and clearing of marginal areas for
agriculture are the major causes of deforestation in the dry lands. Due to the short rainy
season and other precarious conditions, recovery of the woodlands from natural
regeneration is slow. This is made worse by animals such as goats and cattle that browse
and trample on the saplings. Late bush fires also destroy saplings, especially those of A.
quanzensis and Acacia. As a result of persistent bare steep slopes there are avalanches
every year that end up sweeping away bridges and piling up debris along the lakeshore
roads. Breeding grounds for some rare fisheries are also destroyed by siltation, in
addition to fertilizer residues that come along with sediments from the uplands.
The foregoing underscores the role poverty plays in causing deforestation. It is lack of
alternatives to sustainable livelihoods that trap people of the Rift Valley in irrational

--- Page 33 ---
33
behavior such as overcutting wood for fuel and curios on one hand, and overcultivation
and encroachment into marginal areas for food production, on the other.
It is, therefore, crucial that any framework for solving deforestation and, indeed, other
forms of environmental degradation that enhance land degradation, should tackle poverty
as a central objective. This poverty is expressed in terms of insecurity of food, energy,
employment and income sources. It is also critical that the skills base of the population is
taken into account so that adequate empowerment can be achieved in the long term.
5. DECLINING USE OF INDIGENOUS KNOWLEDGE AND TECHNOLOGIES
Historically, rural communities have acquired detailed knowledge, skills and strategies
based on their interaction with the local environment over long periods of time. This stock
of knowledge permeates the social structure and it is the basis for local-level decision-
making in agriculture, food preparation, natural resource management, and a host of other
activities in rural communities. The African tradition is rich in intricacies and, when
properly understood, demonstrates the African appreciation and constant harmony the
community strikes with nature, and how observations are precisely expressed for
communication, such as through songs, taboos, totem animals, custom laws and practices,
place names and nicknames, riddles and proverbs - all these have a story to tell.
Such a complex collection of knowledge, described as indigenous knowledge systems
(IKS), ethnoscience or traditional wisdom evolves over time, has collective ownership and
is communicated orally from one generation to the next. Before rural communities
experienced any institutionalised foreign intervention, it is these indigenous knowledge
systems that have regulated the level of exploitation and utilisation of environmental
resources and ensured their survival - a desirable outcome we now link to the word
"sustainable". However, it is now widely recognised that most valuable traditional
ecological knowledge is being eroded and lost for good for various reasons. Over the past
two decades serious initiatives have been launched to restore the recognition of indigenous
knowledge.
In fact, when the world leaders met in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, at the United Nations
Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED), the so called Earth Summit, in
June 1992, they endorsed Agenda 21, a blue print of the post-Rio Plan of Action on
environment. Chapter 26 of Agenda 21 states that “…Governments and international
organisations should recognise the values, traditional knowledge and resource management
practices that indigenous people use to manage their environments, and apply this
knowledge to other areas where development is taking place. They should also provide
indigenous people with suitable technologies to increase the efficiency of their resource
management.”
5.1 The Complexity of Indigenous Knowledge Systems

--- Page 34 ---
34
The nature of IKS and its systematic linkages are very complex. Researchers have been
able to identify and describe four sets of IKS facets. These are briefly summarised in the
context of the Malawian situation.
5.1.1 Religion: taboos, ceremonies, rituals, myths, beliefs, institutional arrangements,
conflicts. In Malawi, forms of religion that could provide lessons in environmental
preservation are M’mbona, Gule wamkulu, and Kachisi. There are also rich customs and
practices concerned with graveyards, initiation ceremonies, and taboos and beliefs about
inedible plant and animal species which directly or indirectly influence conservation. In
some cases, however, beliefs are engulfed in secrets and this may be a hindrance unless one
is formally initiated into the system.
5.1.2 Production systems: institutional arrangements, technology (gender dimension),
resource tools, labour, marketing and processing, storage. Some of the consideration could
be made on lessons from fallowing and shifting cultivation practised in the traditional
system of agriculture, while the role of women in the labour market provides rich sources of
information.
5.1.3 Environment: access and control of resources, utilisation, rules and regulations,
institutional arrangements. Land tenure and economic security as determined by traditional
systems of marriage, such as chikamwini, chitengwa, chilowoka, have an important bearing
on natural resources management.
5.1.4 Social: socio-political, institutional arrangements, structures, health, technology and
knowledge transfer to the young generations. Social organisation enables certain important
systems of information to be passed on in areas such as warning systems (by observing
swallows, red ants, owls, nkhwezule), family planning methods, use of nature for medicines,
rules of social stratification, and inheritance practices, all of which may have a bearing on
natural resources management.
5.2 Selected Applications of Indigenous Knowledge in Malawi
There are many examples of use of traditional knowledge. Examples given here are
mainly drawn from the biodiversity conservation to make a direct link of IKS to fighting
desertification. This in no way is meant to underplay other forms of IKS.
5.2.1 Domestication of guinea fowls
An old practice in the villages was to use a foster chicken to hatch eggs. It has been
documented that those who had domesticated guinea fowls and were breeding their own
placed guinea fowl eggs collected from the wild into a chicken's nest when it starts to brood.
But then the chicken's eggs were removed so that guinea fowl eggs got a 7-day headstart,
after which the chicken eggs were replaced in the nest. The differential in brooding time
ensured that hatching of eggs of the two species occurs together 21 days later. This has now
generated a technology that has resulted into the rearing of guinea fowls as a common

--- Page 35 ---
35
venture and is now being supported by a scientifically-based breeding programme ready for
dissemination.
5.2.2 The Role of the Community in Biodiversity Conservation
In Salima District, Central Malawi, the local chief established a period from end of
November to end of March or April during which fishing was not allowed in order to allow
fishermen to cultivate food crops. Interestingly, this closed season coincided with the
breeding period of fish. Secondly, in Mangochi district, the chief was able to control the
number of fishermen operating in his area because newcomers had to ask for permission to
be admitted, thus avoiding overfishing.
5.2.3 Detailed Knowledge of Biodiversity
Research conducted at Bunda College of Agriculture has shown that the diversity in
variety/landraces of beans in Malawi owes it to indigenous knowledge in plant science. A
number of bean landraces have been carefully maintained by local communities for different
reasons, such as, disease resistance, drought tolerance, early maturity, high yields, resistance
to pests, cooking characteristics, flavour, taste, etc. The Bunda College research has shown
that women in particular are able to identify and name all the varieties they grow in complex
mixtures. They can also describe the plant growing habits and classify the beans using
colour, shape, size and other characteristics much like scientific nomenclature. This
knowledge base is being used in a "Component Breeding" strategy.
5.2.4 Indigenous Technical Knowledge
Studies have shown that small-holder farmers in Malawi are able to name more than 50
indigenous tree species, explain why certain tree species are retained, tolerated, or managed
in their gardens, giving reasons like for soil improvement, fodder, nutrition, medicine,
fuelwood, building, timber etc., and they are able to prioritise which particular indigenous
fruit trees they would prefer to plant. It is clear that they were able to distinguish accurately
between closely related species of plants, give them different local names, and were well
versed with the phenology of the trees.
The farmers knew which tree species to use for live fencing using truncheons for both their
gardens and bath shelters, or which trees gave root suckers from which they collected
saplings, or which trees could be managed by coppicing. They knew which tree species are
also known locally to conserve water.
A well-documented indigenous plant Faidherbia albida (msangu) is a tree which grows
profusely in alluvial soils. It sheds its leaves during the rainy season, but retains them
during the dry season. Crops grown under its canopy are not shaded from sunlight, while
benefiting from the nitrogen released from the decomposing leaves. Farmers realise the
agricultural importance of this tree and do not cut it unnecessarily. They take it as fertilizer
growing in their fields. One of the many examples of indigenous technical knowledge about
this tree is that given by Chimutu (1995) who learned in a study at Ntonda, Ntcheu District,

--- Page 36 ---
36
that when farmers want to grow or propagate the msangu tree, they would take cattle dung
(after the cattle had fed on msangu pods) and place the dung where they wanted the trees to
grow. The seeds readily germinated because they got scarified as they passed through the
cattle gut. Scientifically, scarification is normally given as a treatment to induce germination
of these legumes because they largely fail to germinate if not scarified. Many other plant
species are traditionally known to have various characteristics and are exploited for purposes
such as pesticides, termiticides, poisons, postharvest storage etc.
5.2.5 Traditional Knowledge Concerning Health
Much more detailed traditional ecological knowledge of medicinal plants has
accumulated as a result of the fight by humans against disease, for the benefit of both
humans and livestock. There has always been knowledge of plants with medicinal
properties and claims made by herbalists on treatment of ailments is not all to be brushed
aside. In western medicine, some 20% of drugs are still directly derived from plants which
form the primary source in traditional medicine. Ethnomedical practitioners, variously
categorised as traditional healers, herbalists, traditional birth attendants (TBAs) etc, provide
a most wide-spread form of health care in Africa, and in some cases, registered successes
derive from an understanding of IKS, for example, in pychosocial and cultural illnesses.
With such a wide range of benefits accrued from trees, shrubs and herbs, it comes as no
surprise that a code of conduct was evolved regarding sustainable harvesting of plant and
animal products used for medicines. For example, the herbalist is supposed to remove bark
from one side of the trunk only (apparently to avoid ring-barking the tree); or remove only
roots of a certain size, but not the tap root in any case, etc. However, once certain herbalists
became more prone to profit making, such IKS broke down thus causing overexploitation
and threat to biodiversity.
Programmes to domesticate medicinal plants as a conservation measure and to locally
supply raw materials for primary health care have been effected. The following is a
quotation from a World Health Publication: “There is … much in favour of establishing
programmes for producing standardised and safe galenical traditional preparations for
potential use in primary health care, with the eventual aim of discovering their active
principles. Even if the active principles have not yet been identified in some plants used in
Traditional Medicine historical evidence of the value of such plants could result in useful
preparations provided they are safe”.
5.3 External pressures which disrupt the passing on of traditional values and
skills
Traditional ecological knowledge and values about native plants and animals used to be
passed on by word of mouth when children spent much time with elders. Nowadays,
children spend more time in schools, in transit to and from schools and in front of the
television in urban areas. Urbanisation itself greatly contributes to the erosion of IK while
the generation of the more competent elders with a store of such knowledge is fast
disappearing as they age and die, without good replacements. It is becoming more
apparent that many parents are abandoning traditional subsistence activities to seek jobs

--- Page 37 ---
37
elsewhere. This denies the parents adequate time to teach the children their language,
customs and skills. The children themselves do not spend enough time with nature,
whether alone or with peers. The less exposure means that there is a limited range of
activities upon which their cultures’ traditional sense of place was formerly based. As
the children learnt from the elders through hands-on experiences, a specialised
vocabulary was passed on to them, but reduced activities in this area has resulted in the
erosion of linguistically encoded traditional knowledge about places. Perhaps Malawi,
with 85% of the population still rural (compared with 50% in South Africa) could
capitalise on a considerable amount of traditional knowledge.
VII INTERVENTIONS: TOWARDS A NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMME TO
COMBAT DESERTIFICATION
The National Action Programme will be formulated according to the themes examined
above, as redefined, below. In addition, two more themes (Institutional arrangements and
Funding arrangements), as discussed at the national forum, have been included:
a) Environment Management
b) Food Security
c) Water Resources Management and Development
d) Renewable Energy
e) Deforestation
f) Indigenous Knowledge Systems and Technologies
g) Institutional Arrangements
h) Funding Arrangements
1. Overall Strategy of the National Programme
Consistent with article 10 of CCD and article 8 of Annex 1 (Regional Implementation
Annex for Africa), the overall strategy of the national action programme shall:
• emphasize integrated local development programmes for affected areas, based on
participatory mechanisms and on integration of strategies for poverty eradication into
efforts to combat desertification and mitigate the effects of drought;
• aim at strengthening the capacity of local authorities and ensuring the active
involvement of local populations, communities and groups, with emphasis on
education and training, mobilization of non-governmental organisations with proven
expertise and strengthening of decentralised government structures.
2. Measures to be Taken in the National Action Programme
• Measures to improve the economic environment with a view to eradicating poverty;
• Measures to conserve natural resources;

--- Page 38 ---
38
• Measures to improve institutional organization;
• Measures to improve knowledge of desertification;
• Measures to monitor and assess the effects of drought.
The following are some of the interventions formulated during the process of
identification of the issues pertaining to the CCD, involving visits of task forces to
districts followed by a national forum held from 1-3 November 1999:
3. Goal of the CCD.
The goal of the country programme on CCD is to combat desertification and mitigate the
effects of drought.
4. ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT
4.0 Overall Objective
The Government and communities should ensure that there is a suitable and safe
environment for one to live in through government departments and community based
management groups, i.e. Village Natural Resources Management Committees (VNRMC).
4.1 Broad Areas of Intervention
The following are action plans that can be carried out or promoted at central government
level:
1. Diversify Malawi’s economy from over dependence on agricultural production
and raise the contribution of other sectors in the economy.
2. Increase smallholder agricultural productivity, as one of the measures to
reduce poverty – this will greatly assist in the conservation and protection of
natural resources and environment.
3. Reduce demand for fuelwood by improving the energy efficiency of
traditional cooking and by introducing economically alternative sources of
energy to fuelwood.
4. Promote community based forest/natural resource management activities and
promote alternative sources of income activities for the people that engage in
exploiting natural resources like selling wood.
5. Address major problems of unsuitable agricultural practices and emphasize
community awareness of the importance of the catchment protection to
enhance availability of water in the country’s rivers.
6. Promote the use of environmental impact assessments to design a larger
number of projects, sector programs, and adjustment operations so as to select
best alternative in terms of environmental impact and sustainable

--- Page 39 ---
39
development. A special effort should be made to develop assessment capacity
in the field and strengthen popular participation.
7. Put in place appropriate policies regarding concession and pricing of wood,
including stumpage fees.
8. Define proper policies for managing natural resources and implement them at
national level - this includes coming up with subsidiary legislation for the
legislation already in place.
9. Strengthen the Environmental Affairs Department as the Environmental
Coordinating Agency in Malawi to enable it address effectively issues of land
degradation, desertification control and drought management.
10. Identify and strengthen existing institutions to increase their capacity to
conduct training and other relevant activities.
11. Those stakeholders opening hotel industries along Lake Malawi and Shire
river should be producing plans which are friendly to the environment before
construction work is effected.
12. Those opening any mining projects should be producing plans which are
environmentally friendly to avoid pollution and destroying the natural
resources around the area where the project is effected.
13. Rubbish disposal should be provided even in the villages.
14. Promote uniform construction of pit latrines with San Plat sanitation to reduce
waterborne diseases and train enterpreneurs.
15. Government projects, including MASAF projects, should produce
environmentally friendly plans before effecting any construction projects, and
should include rehabilitation work after completion of the project, such as
filling of gravel pits and reforestation. Agreement forms should be signed by
both the communities and project implementers, including compensation to
the communities where the environment has been destroyed as a result of
human error.
4.2 Community Based Interventions
The following are the action plans that can be carried out by communities. These have
also incorporated the suggested action plan that were proposed during the sensitization
meetings.
4.2.1 Reduction of high rate of population growth
1. Promote community based family planning method dissemination.
2. Promote EIC on effects of high population on the economy through
sensitisation meetings.
3. Discourage early marriages and teen pregnancies
4. Promote vasectomy to men
5. Polygamy should be disallowed and people should be advised to stop having
children outside marriages.
6. Establish law limiting the number of children in the family and empower
women to decide on how many children the family should have.

--- Page 40 ---
40
4.2.2 Reduction of poverty through provision of alternative sources of income.
1. Provision of loans through CBOs for IGAs.
2. Train communities in vocational employment skills.
3. Promote ENRM based IGAs eg. bee keeping.
4. Provide training on a demand driven basis to community groups and/or
individuals on ENRM based IGAs.
5. Develop and facilitate access to resources for ENRM based IGAs.
6. Encourage investors to open up businesses in dryland areas.
4.2.3 Management of Communal Forestry resources and wood lots.
1. Promote production of multipurpose trees on farm plots.
2. Improve markets for wood products.
3. Promote development of school clubs through tree planting programmes.
4. Promote the establishment of community wood lots and private plantations.
5. Promote tree farming among communities for their own use and profit.
6. Promote local collection of tree seed and train people on how they identify
best sample trees for seed collection.
7. Train people that they can also use truncheons when they want to plant some
tree species.
4.2.4 Soil conservation strategies for crop lands and adjacent lands
1. Promote awareness in soil conservation at community level mainly through
existing social organizations
2. Promote biological conservation measures through promotion of rotational
grazing
3. Promote establishment of perennial crops for better vegetation cover of soil
4. Develop schemes for the establishment of vegetative cover in schools, church
yards, river banks, market places and the commons in general.
5. Promote improved farming methods that accommodate soil and water
conservation.
6. Train village headmen on land allocation systems to avoid allocating land on
very steep slopes for cultivation but allocate it for tree regeneration/tree
planting.
7. Inform village headmen to enforce the requirement that six metres or above
should be left undisturbed to protect the riverbank from erosion.
4.2.5 Biodiversity Conservation: Plant and animal conservation strategies in protected
and outside protected areas established
1. Encourage, develop and support all appropriate initiatives for local people
participation (communal and individual) in wildlife and environment
management and utilization.
2. Integrate wildlife conservation entirely with environmental conservation by
establishment of protected woodlands, aquatic systems and other habitats, as
community owned conservation areas.
3. Promote the creation of wildlife sanctuaries including churchyards.

--- Page 41 ---
41
4. Establish a more effective wildlife-use system that combines wildlife
conservation with pastoralism.
5. Return the powers of Chiefs, such as traditional courts under Traditional
Authorities as they used to be, to provide legal mandate for chiefs to try cases
on natural resources management.
5. FOOD SECURITY
5.0 Overall Objectives
1. To provide irrigation services to farm families or groups e.g. schemes, with
improved/ appropriate technology, crop diversification for increased crop
production.
2. To rehabilitate existing schemes so that they are brought back to their old
productive status.
3. To review policy affecting operations of schemes/ institutions.
4. To create pilot areas in upland areas emphasising agroforestry and natural
resources management for high crop production.
The following (underlined) issues were identified and actions are suggested.
5.1 Increased levels of soil erosion resulting in barren lands being left for crop
production
1. Provide adequate and appropriate extension service to natural resource
management.
2. Government staff in the rural areas should be answerable to the communities
in which they work.
3. Research into appropriate technologies.
4. Land management programmes must be seen to be part of a farming system.
5.2 Inappropriate farming practices which result in reduced crop yields, increased
vulnerability to land degradation, and inefficient use of the land.
1. Strengthen implementation of recommended farming practices i.e. contour
ridging, agro-forestry, use of votives hedgerows, application of organic and
inorganic manure.
2. Introduce modern farming techniques such as animal and tractor drawn
implements, including hire schemes.
3. Deep tillage.
5.3 Chronic poverty, with no propensity to invest in land improvements
1. Intensify agro-forestry systems especially in hilly and dry areas.
2. Introduce other income generating activities.
3. Population policies geared towards family planning so that the few resources
that are available can satisfy the population.
5.4 Soil fertility decline, resulting in stunted crop growth

--- Page 42 ---
42
1. Strengthen campaigns for crop rotation, mixed cropping, application of
organic manure.
5.5 Adverse weather conditions, resulting in poor crop performance
1. Breed for drought resistant crops.
2. Create new schemes for irrigated agriculture and target farm families.
3. Rehabilitate old agriculture schemes - their current poor state is due to poor
policies and negligence.
5.6 High population growth, resulting in high pressure exerted on natural resources,
causing shortage of supplies
1. Implement sound population control policies and disseminate information on
family planning, both modern and effective traditional methods.
2. Shift dependence away from natural resources.
5.7 Inadequate access to information, causing limited technology transfer
1. Reduce farmer-staff ratio by increased training of staff, such as through re-
opening of the Natural Resources College.
2. Re-introduce the training of farmers.
5.8 Limited policing capabilities by Government, resulting into non-compliance to
lease covenants, and development of a slaughter harvest spirit on the part of most
estate owners
1. Train lessees to be more responsible.
2 Employ more land inspectors.
3. Toughen penalties on offenders.
5.9 Declining holding sizes, with inadequate food production
1. Intensification of operations.
2. Introduce hydroponics.
5.10 Weak levels of crop diversification: dependence on one crop for food and cash
(maize and tobacco, respectively)
1. Introduce new suitable crops such as paprika, macadamia.
5.11 Inadequate sources of income generation with the result that natural resources
(trees) have become a major source for generating income
1. Intensification of tree planting.
2. Devolving powers to local communities to ensure more effective control.
3. Develop a spirit of creativity amongst the communities so that other avenues
for generating incomes can be identified.
6. WATER RESOURCES MANAGEMENT AND DEVELOPMENT

--- Page 43 ---
43
6.0 Overall Objective
To improve supply and sanitation of water
6.1 Strategies to Manage Drinking Water Supplies
The following strategies and management policies should be implemented to solve the
problem of desertification and consequently water resource degradation and depletion in
Malawi.
1. Implement catchment management measures such as agroforestry and
appropriate land husbandry techniques, such as land conservation practices to
impede run-off.
2. Identify remedial measures to rehabilitate the affected catchments i.e.
afforestation, revegetation, filling up of gullies, development of protective
works or soil conservation measures such as contour bands etc, prevention of
encroachment into the rehabilitated areas.
3. Encourage farmers to use organic manure, and adopt proper methods of
application of fertiliser and pesticides.
4. Promote researched measures of integrated pest management.
5. Enforce legislation on handling and safety of pesticides.
6. Develop environmental messages and conduct public awareness campaigns to
educate the public through radio, newspapers, and posters against cultivation
along river banks or steep slopes or other marginal lands which are likely to
cause environmental degradation.
7. Provide basic water and sanitation services to those communities which have
undertaken to contribute towards the capital cost of their facilities such as
drilling more boreholes for the communities and using the available surface
water resources such as Lake Malawi as gravity fed sources of drinking water
supply schemes.
8. Promote cost-effective technologies and approaches (such as handpumps,
dugwells and upgrading of traditional water sources and sanitation services)
that offer hope to all especially women and children who are highly affected.
9. Ensure sustainability of natural resources and other facilities through
community ownership and management, community decision-making in their
design and active involvement of women at all stages of individual projects.

--- Page 44 ---
44
For example, a sense of ownership is fostered by sensitising the community
and promoting self-determination, self-reliance and self-help spirit through the
formation, training and supervision of a structure of committees.
10. Protect catchment areas from encroachment by improved agricultural
production activities and settlements through enforcement of existing laws,
and imposing much heavier fines for forestry offenses as a deterrent.
11. Review and revise the current legislation in water resources management so
that it matches and acts in accordance with the present water resources
management and sanitation regulations.
12. Promote effective and sustainable delivery of improved water supply and
sanitation facilities through Government, non-governmental organizations and
private sector provision of goods and services, and public sector promotion
and support.
13. Promote water harvesting technologies at household level and water
conveyance.
14. Harmonise fragmented policies and acts.
15. Strengthen partnerships between stakeholders.
16. Review the current government structure to conform to an appropriate
structure for community based natural resources participation.
17. Harmonise the existing extension systems between ministries of agriculture,
forestry, fisheries and water.
18. Introduce a water levy on water providers and pass on the levy to the Forestry
Department.
19. Encourage packaging and selling of water from springs as an income
generating activity.
7. RENEWABLE ENERGY
7.0 Overall Objective
To diversify energy sources
7.1 Strategic options for mitigating people’s overdependence on woodfuel for
energy and income

--- Page 45 ---
45
There are several strategies that could be pursued in order to mitigate the problems of
overdependence on woodfuel for energy and income in Malawi. Among them are the
following:
1. At present only 4% of the country’s population has access to commercial
clean energy services. There is need to change this and increase access to
more than 10% within the next 10 years by:
1.1 Promoting rural electrification through grid and no grid options;
1.2 Encouraging the local manufacturing of energy related appropriate
technologies;
1.3 Establishing a revolving fund for renewable energy loans and allow
the poor to access the loans for purchasing solar home systems and
connecting electricity to their homes;
2. Promote energy-related income generating activities such as biomass
briquetting so that people who are dependent on woodfuel as a source of
income are provided with alternative sources of income and energy.
3. Improve efficiency in production and use of energy resources through the
promotion of efficient charcoal production technologies and promotion of
improved cook stoves at household level.
4. Introduce sustainable charcoal production systems by commercializing pine
charcoal production from plantations in the country. This would help to
relocate people who are currently producing charcoal unsustainably from
customary land forests to plantation forests where they could also be taught
how to reforestate areas from which they have cut down trees.
5. Provide concessionery funding for community power producers and provide
incentives in form of duty and surtax exemption on equipment and end use
devices that use electricity and other renewables such as solar and biogas
energy.
6. Introduce low cost technologies for electrical wiring such as prewired boards,
prepaid meters and load limiters. At the same time put in place arrangements
for hire purchase systems.
7. Review policies that relate to capital contribution on grid connections and
remove it completely.
8. Build the necessary capacities and institutional structures for managing
alternative sources of energy to wood fuels through training professionals in
the energy sector and training technicians and artisans who will install and
maintain the new technologies.

--- Page 46 ---
46
9. Increase funding for the promotion of renewable energy technologies so that
this source of energy plays a significant role in the country’s energy mix.
10. Promote biogas technology.
11. Subsidize the cost of cookers and reduce tariffs on electricity.
12. Introduce appliances that use non-wood products e.g. coal stoves.
8. DEFORESTATION
8.0 Overall Objectives
1. To improve land productivity
2. To instill sense of ownership in the people through participatory management
3. To restore powers of traditional authorities to manage forests.
8.1 Framework for Solutions
1. Build local capacity to manage natural resources - the Forestry Department
should retain local staff to be supported by chiefs, village headmen and ward
councilors.
2. Introduce or improve vegetable production in some areas, especially those
close to city markets. These include Likoma/Chizumulu Islands and Usisya,
Salima, Blantyre (Mdeka), Mwanza and Chikwawa. There is also an
opportunity to start projects in extraction of edible oils from M. oleifera, neem
and palm fruits.
3. Promote fruit juice extraction from A. digitata (Malambe) growing in North
Mzimba and Likoma Island, throughout the belt down to the Lower Shire.
There is also scope for improving supply of palm leaves and bamboos in order
to promote handicraft products.
4. Review the marketing structure with a view to improving the pricing
distribution and promotion. There should be an environmental component in
the price which can be ploughed back to either a Beach Village Committee or
a Village Natural Resources Management committee.
5. Identify alternative sources of energy and technologies for smoking fish and
domestic use. In this regard the role of windmills, solar panels, improved
smoking furnaces, maibawo and paper briquettes cannot be over emphasised.

--- Page 47 ---
47
6. Protect fragile areas such as hillslopes and river banks in order to control
avalanches and siltation and improve wood supply through afforestation and
reforestation using most suited species, both indigenous and exotic species.
All riverine areas need to be planted with trees and cultivation should be
restricted to 50 meters away from the river banks. These conservation
activities need to be planned and implemented jointly with specialists in
biodiversity conservation and climate change. It is only through working
together that meaningful synergy will be achieved among the Rio generation
of conventions.
7. Discourage burnt bricks along the lakeshore and instead promote cement
blocks.
8. Encourage planting of indigenous fruit trees.
9. Formulate district afforestation programmes with guidance from Forestry
Department, and strengthen monitoring e.g. enforcement of the 10% forest
cover for estates,
9. INDIGENOUS KNOWLEDGE SYTEMS AND TECHNOLOGIES
9.0 Overall Objective
To promote cultural values and heritage
9.1 Strategies and actions for Integrating Indigenous Knowledge into
Programmes
1. The first step in the valuation and selective use of indigenous knowledge in
conservation and other human activities is its recognition.
2. Document and evaluate, as a matter of urgency, the diverse range of
indigenous knowledge that relates to biodiversity since people with such
knowledge are the aged and are not being adequately replaced.
3. Employ rural experts in traditional practices, such as herbalists and folklorists,
to convey their understanding of the importance of biodiversity to schools,
communities, NGOs, government officials, and International agencies.
4. Develop, in collaboration with indigenous expertise, new sustainable systems
of biodiversity conservation and biological resource management.
5. Assuming that programme planners understand the full range of fauna and
flora that different indigenous groups use, the planners can better assist in the
transfer of knowledge among the groups.

--- Page 48 ---
48
6. Local knowledge can be tapped as a shortcut to compiling an inventory of
biological resources e.g.in soil and crop surveys.
7. Local knowledge can serve as a basis for environmental monitoring and as an
early warning system of ecological changes, e.g through knowledge of
indicator species.
8. Local observers can act as monitors of faunal and floral growth, distribution,
and change.
9. Indigenous ideology can serve as a resource for conservation metaphors and
practices. The North honors IK but dismisses indigenous beliefs as primitive
or superstitious, yet many African conservation practices are unintelligible
without reference to ideas that are labelled beliefs.
10. Incorporate indigenous knowledge in environmental education programmes in
the school curriculum.
10. INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS
•
• 10.0 Overall Objective
•
• To empower local communities
•
• 10.1 Expected outputs from this programme:
•
• 1. Extension system harmonised
•
• 2. Relevant policies to combating desertification harmonised
•
• 3. Community based organisations established and empowered
•
• 4. Traditional authority including courts restored
•
• 5 Women empowered on family planning
•
• 6. NAP Steering Committee strengthened
•
• 7. National funding mechanism established and operational.
•
•
• 11. FUNDING ARRANGEMENTS
•

--- Page 49 ---
49
• 11.0 Overall Objective
•
• To enable programme implementation
•
• 11.1 Expected outputs from this programme:
•
• 1. Levies on processed water introduced
•
• 2. Sectoral funds, Trust Fund and District Development Funds
receiving and disbursing financial resources to support desertification
programmes
• 2.1 Donors supporting desertification programmes
• 2.2 Subsidies and loans for desertification funds made available.

--- Page 50 ---
50
PART II
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Foreword
Acronyms and Abbreviations
Table of Contents
1. Introduction
2 Overall Strategy of the National Action Programme
3. The NAP Preparatory Process in Malawi
4. Range of NAP Issues and their Relation to Existing Policies, Strategies
and Programmes
5. Dryland Issues Arising from the Consultative Process
5.1 Food Insecurity
5.2 Problems in Water Resources Management and Development
5.3 Problems in Renewable Energy
5.4 The Problem of Deforestation
5.5 Problems of Environment Management
5.6 Underutilisation of Indegenous Knowledge Systems and
Technologies
5.7 Weak Institutional Arrangements
5.8 Funding Arrangements
National Action Programme
1. Food Security
2. Water Resources Management and Development
3. Renewable Energy
4. Deforestation
5. Environmental Management
6. Indigenous Knowledge Systems and Technologies
7. Institutional Arrangements
8. Funding Arrangements

--- Page 51 ---
1
NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMME FOR MALAWI FOR THE UNITED
NATIONS CONVENTION TO COMBAT DESERTIFICATION (CCD)
1. Introduction
Desertification is defined as land degradation in arid, semi-arid and dry-sub-humid areas
resulting from adverse natural and/or human activities. The United Nations Conference
on Environment and Development, UNCED (also called Earth Summit), held in Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil, in June 1992, offered an opportunity for world leaders to consider
international laws for managing natural resources and their processes, in a new,
integrated approach to the problem emphasising action to promote sustainable
development at the community level. One of the most significant agreements reached at
Rio was the decision to elaborate an international Convention to Combat Desertification
(CCD). This was one of the three conventions, the other two being the UN Convention
on Biological Diversity (CBD) and the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC).
The objective of CCD is to combat desertification and mitigate the effects of drought in
countries experiencing serious drought and/or desertification, particularly in Africa,
through effective action at all levels, supported by international cooperation and
partnership arrangements, in the framework of an integrated approach which is
consistent with Agenda 21, with a view to contributing to the achievement of sustainable
development in affected areas.
The adoption in Paris on 17 June 1994 of CCD represented a major step in the response
of the international community to the problems of drought and desertification. The
convention entered into force on 26th December 1996. Malawi ratified the CCD on 13th
June 1996 in recognition of almost 3 million hectares of semi-arid and dry sub-humid
lands stretching the Rift Valley Floor from Karonga to Nsanje and some parts of
Mzimba, Chiradzulu, Mwanza and the Phalombe Plain.
2. Overall Strategy of the National Action Programme
Consistent with article 10 of CCD and article 8 of Annex 1 (Regional Implementation
Annex for Africa), the overall strategy of the national action programme shall:
• emphasize integrated local development programmes for affected areas, based on
participatory mechanisms and on integration of strategies for poverty eradication into
efforts to combat desertification and mitigate the effects of drought;
• aim at strengthening the capacity of local authorities and ensuring the active
involvement of local populations, communities and groups, with emphasis on
education and training, mobilization of non-governmental organisations with proven
expertise and strengthening of decentralised government structures.

--- Page 52 ---
2
The CCD lays down seven general requirements for National Action Programmes:
• “incorporate long-term strategies…, emphasise implementation and be integrated
with national policies for sustainable development;
• allow for modifications to be made in response to changing circumstances and be
sufficiently flexible at the local level to cope with different socio-economic,
biological and geo-physical conditions;
• give particular attention to the implementation of preventative measures for lands that
are not yet degraded or which are only slightly degraded;
• enhance national climatological, meteorological and hydrological capabilities and the
means to provide for drought early warning;
• promote policies and strengthen institutional frameworks which develop co-operation
and co-ordination, and facilitate access, by local populations to appropriate
information and technology;
• provide for effective participation at the local, national and regional levels…; and
• require regular review of, and progress reports on, their implementation.”
The Convention also lays down five voluntary elements:
♦ “the establishment and/or strengthening of early warning systems and of mechanisms
for helping environmental refugees;
♦ the strengthening of preparedness for drought, and of the management of its impacts,
at local, national, sub-regional and regional levels;
♦ the establishment and/or strengthening… of food security systems, including storage
and marketing facilities, particularly in rural areas;
♦ the establishment of projects to develop alternative livelihoods that could provide
incomes in drought prone areas; and
♦ the development of sustainable irrigation schemes for both crops and livestock”.
Finally, the Convention identifies priority fields for action and says that each affected
country Party, depending on its circumstances, should include at least some of them in its
National Action Programme:
(cid:1) “promotion of alternative livelihoods and improvement of national economic
environments with a view to strengthening programmes aimed at the eradication of
poverty and at ensuring food security;
(cid:1) demographic dynamics;
(cid:1) sustainable management of natural resources;
(cid:1) development and efficient use of various energy sources;
(cid:1) institutional and legal frameworks;
(cid:1) strengthening of capabilities for assessment and systematic observation, including
hydrological and meteorological services; and
(cid:1)(cid:1) capacity-building, education and public awareness”.

--- Page 53 ---
3
3. The NAP Preparatory Process in Malawi
Malawi conducted sensitization and consultative meetings in all the 26 districts between
May and August 1999. These meetings were held with key members of the District
Development Committees (DDC). The membership of the DDC included Line Ministries,
Members of Parliament, Chiefs, NGOs, under the Chairmanship of the District
Commissioner. Following these consultations, six experts wrote position papers to
summarise the findings which were then presented at a one-day workshop (8 October
1999) of the NAP Steering Committee. The Committee shaped the findings into
programme areas and asked one Committee member to produce a consolidated Issues
Document. A National Forum consisting of representatives of the District Local
Government Administration, Chiefs, Line Ministries, the University of Malawi, and
NGOs was then convened from 1-3 November 1999 to discuss the Issues Document and
set an agenda for drafting of the Action Programme. Following the drafting exercise by a
member of the Committee, a stakeholders workshop consisting of the NAP Steering
Committee and the National Council for the Environment was convened from 21-22
March 2000 to discuss and finalise the Draft National Action Programme.
4. Range of NAP Issues and their Relation to Existing Policies, Strategies and
Programmes
Following her participation at the UNCED in Rio de Janeiro in June 1992, and in
response to the agreements concluded at the Rio Conference, Malawi started developing
the National Environmental Action Plan (NEAP) in late 1992. The NEAP was formally
launched in December, 1994. The NEAP describes the environmental situation in Malawi
and outlines a series of actions that should be taken in order to redress the aggravating
degradation and bring the utilization of natural resources within sustainable limits. Nine
key environmental issues were identified, namely: soil erosion, deforestation, water
resources depletion and degradation, high population growth, depletion of fish stocks,
threats to biodiversity, human habitat degradation, climate change, and air pollution. The
process used to identify issues and the issues that have come up in the CCD consultations
are similar to those from the NEAP. However, the activities identified for
implementation of the CCD will be complimentary to the NEAP rather than a duplication
since implementing sectors participated fully in the whole process of consultations. In
addition, lessons have been learned from implementing NEAP. These have led to
improved strategies for the implementation of CCD at the grass roots level. One of the
strategies will be direct disbursement of funds to the communities for micro-projects.
5. Dryland Issues Arising from the Consultative Process
From the national consultative process, eight broad themes were identified. The
following highlights major issues under each theme:

--- Page 54 ---
4
5.1 Food Insecurity, seen as a result of:
5.1.1 Weak levels of crop and food diversification: dependence on one crop for food
and nutrition; and cash and economic growth (maize and tobacco, respectively)
5.1.2 Increased levels of soil erosion resulting in barren lands being left for crop
production
5.1.3 Inappropriate farming practices that result in reduced crop yield, increased
vulnerability to land degradation, and inefficient use of the land.
5.1.4 Chronic poverty, with no propensity to invest in land improvements
5.1.5 Soil fertility decline, resulting in stunted crop growth
5.1.6 Adverse weather conditions, resulting in poor crop performance
5.1.7 High population growth, resulting in high pressure exerted on natural resources,
causing shortage of supplies
5.1.8 Inadequate access to information, causing limited technology transfer
5.1.9 Declining land holding sizes, with inadequate food production
5.1.10 Poorly focused extension system.
5.2 Problems in Water Resources Management and Development, resulting from:
5.2.1 Encroachment
Encroachment into marginal or catchment areas has led to flashy runoff that
rapidly runs without sufficiently recharging the groundwater aquifers. Most of the
boreholes or shallow wells are drying up in these areas due to poor groundwater
recharge thereby reducing the water table. It is now common to see rivers from
these areas drying up or experiencing dwindling flow even if it could be in normal
years in terms of rainfall.
5.2.2 Water scarcity and droughts
Water resources are becoming inadequate and scarce to meet the demand due to
increases in population. Climate change has resulted into increased seasonal
variability in the run-off. This problem has basically arisen as a result of
droughts, with the resultant unreliable seasonal flows. There are frequent
occurrences of droughts that are initiated by the El Nino and Southern Oscillation
(ENSO) phenomena. These have resulted in declining amounts of both surface
and groundwater resources due to inadequate amounts of rainfall to replenish
water resources.
5.2.3 Sedimentation (siltation)
Clearing of vegetation cover has eventually resulted in increased soil erosion and
runoff resulting into increased siltation in rivers. Silt loads (sedimentation) in
surface runoff from soil erosion lead to significant problems in down stream water
quality, including increased suspended solids and turbidity, resulting in high water
treatment costs and water flow problems. Since the majority of the people reside
in the rural areas and depend on rivers for water supply, chances of drinking
unclean water are very high. Also, the silted river courses and water reservoirs

--- Page 55 ---
5
tend to have reduced capacities and when it rains the banks may overflow,
causing flooding as has always been the case in Shire River Valley and its major
tributaries, or the water erodes the bank. Flooding in the dryland areas along the
Rift Valley is one of the major natural disasters in Malawi. It is mainly an
imported problem from the catchment areas higher up in the country.
5.2.4 Chemical contamination
With the increase in use of marginal land, and cultivation of protected areas, and
loss of soil fertility, use of agrochemicals such as fertilizers, pesticides and
insecticides become inevitable in order to achieve increased productivity.
However, runoff of agrochemicals resulting from poor conservation measures
may have a detrimental effect on the quality of the water resources such as rivers,
streams, lakes, groundwater, etc.
5.2.5 Boreholes and Taps
Drilling of boreholes and construction of taps have been imposed on communities
without building capacity to promote a sense of ownership and empowerment to
manage the facilities and associated catchment areas. As a result, some boreholes
and taps (up to 40%) get abandoned when the first breakdown occurs, or the water
table has receded, thereby forccing the communities to drink unsafe, dirty water.
5.3 Problems in Renewable Energy, as a result of:
5.3.1 Low access to electricity due to restrictive distribution policies, high wiring costs
and capital contribution requirements. At present only 4% of the country’s
population has access to commercial clean energy services. The rural areas are
clearly at a disadvantage
5.3.2 Limited affordable alternative sources of energy to woodfuels
5.3.3 Limited utilization of some biomass materials of agricultural wastes
5.3.4 Low efficiency of biomass conversion technologies
5.3.5 Low efficiency of woodfuel end-use devices
5.3.6 Unsustainable use of woodfuels and other biomass resources leading to
deforestation and land degradation
5.3.7 Limited affordability of electricity and end use devices
5.3.8 Lack of Community Power Producers
5.3.9 Lack of local manufacturing of end use devices and accessories.
5.4 The problem of Deforestation. caused by:
5.4.1 Agricultural expansion without improvement in productivity per unit area, in
particular the growth of the estate sector and opening up of new gardens in
customary land
5.4.2 Economic and development activities that require use of fuel wood to burn bricks
for sale or for building school blocks

--- Page 56 ---
6
5.4.3 Wanton cutting of trees for tobacco curing, building tobacco sheds and smoking
fish
5.4.4 Cutting down of trees for charcoal burning and for sale because of unemployment
5.4.5 Slash and burn method of agriculture.
5.5 Problems of Environment Management, in light of:
5.5.1 Bush fire problems that threaten soils and biodiversity
5.5.2 Waste management that is underdeveloped
5.5.3 Need to restore powers of Chiefs to try cases on natural resources management
5.5.4 Need to promote the use of Environmental Impact Assessment before projects are
implemented
5.6 Underutilisation of Indigenous Knowledge Systems and Technologies, due to:
5.6.1 Lack of recognition of IKS in conservation and other human activities
5.6.2 Inadequate knowledge of the diverse range of indigenous knowledge
5.6.3 Lack of awareness that local knowledge can serve as a basis for environmental
monitoring and as an early warning system of ecological changes, e.g through
knowledge of indicator species.
5.6.4 Lack of awareness that local knowledge can be tapped as a shortcut to compiling
an inventory of biological resources e.g.in soil and crop surveys..
5.7 Weak Institutional Arrangements, reflected by:
5.7.1 Extension system not harmonised
5.7.2 Women not adequately empowered in family planning
5.7.3 Relevant policies to combat desertification not harmonised
5.7.4 Need to strengthen the capacity of Environmental Affairs Department
5.8 Funding Arrangements, requiring:
5.8.1 Setting up a sustainable funding mechanism for CCD implementation

--- Page 57 ---
7
NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMME FOR MALAWI FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS
CONVENTION TO COMBAT DESERTIFICATION
COUNTRY PROGRAMME GOAL: TO COMBAT DESERTIFICATION AND MITIGATE THE EFFECTS OF DROUGHT IN MALAWI
THROUGH EFFECTIVE ACTION AT ALL LEVELS
PROG. MEANS OF KEY TIME-
COMP GOAL OBJEC- STRATEG- ACTIVITIES OUTPUTS VARIFICA- TARGET ACTORS FRAME
ONE- TIVES IES TION AREAS
NTS
1. Food To •To •Promote crop •Intensify use of •Number and types Reports, visits/ Mangochi, MoAI, 5 Years
Secur- improve Increase diversification crops other than of crops increased Biannual Karonga, NGOs,
ity and product- maize Dedza, MoNREA
sustain ion of •Provide •Construct small •Hectarage under Salima, Private
food food and irrigation scale community irrigation increased Chikwawa Sector
suffic- cash services to dams; construct Nsanje,
iency crops and farm families shallow wells and Mzimba,
livestock or groups provide treddle Nkhata-Bay
products pumps for irrigation
•Promote •Intensify growing •Hectarage of area- Reports, visits/ 5 Years
crops of specific crops in a specific crops Biannual
according to given agroecologica increased
ecological zone •Eating habits
suitability changed
•Promote •Intensify raising of •Number of Reports, visits/ 5 Years
livestock specific species of different livestock Annual
industry livestock in selected species increased
zones
•Review policy •Relevant policy Reports/ 5 Years
affecting agricultural reviewed Biannual
production

--- Page 58 ---
8
PROG. MEANS OF KEY TIME-
COMP GOAL OBJEC- STRATEG- ACTIVITIES OUTPUTS VARIFICA- TARGET ACTORS FRAME
ONE- TIVES IES TION AREAS
NTS
Food To •To •Rehabilitate •Hectarage and Reports, visits/ 5 Years
Secur- improve increase existing schemes so frequency of Annual
ity and product- that they are brought growing crops
(cont’d) sustain ion of back to their increased
food food and productive status
sufficie cash
ncy crops and
livestock
products
•Provide farm •Farmers using Reports, visits/ Mangochi, 5 Years
mechanisation improved machinery Annual Karonga,
services, in increased Dedza,
particular tractors Salima,
Chikwawa
Nsanje,
•Initiate better •Initiate targeted •Areas under good Reports, visits/ Mzimba, 5 Years
land husbandry best farming farming practices Annual Nkhata-Bay
in selected practices for farmer increased
areas adoption
•Provide adequate/ •Farm families Reports, visits/ 5 Years
appropriate adopting better land Annual
extension service to husbandry practices
NRM increased
•Promote food •Train specific •Farm families •Training MoAI, 5 Years
processing and groups of farmers in going into food Reports, observ- ADM-
marketing by selected food processing increased ations ARC,
smallholder processing methods •Products on the Private
farmers market / Annual Sector

--- Page 59 ---
9
PROG. MEANS OF KEY TIME-
COMPO GOAL OBJEC- STRATEG- ACTIVITIES OUTPUTS VARIFICA- TARGET ACTORS FRAME
NENTS TIVES IES TION AREAS
2. Water To •To •Promote •Avoid settlements • Catchment Surveys/ Salima MoLH- 5 Years
Resour- impr- protect effectiveness of by enforcement of encroachment Annual Dedza PPS
ces ove catch- the legal existing laws and reduced Mangochi MoWD
Manage- supply ment framework imposing much Karonga/ DDLGA
ment and areas heavier fines. Chitipa MoNR-
and sanit- from •Sensitise the Chikwawa EA
Develop- ation encroach Judiciary and MoAI
ment of ment Prosecutors
water •Gazette more areas
considered to be
catchments
•To •Improve •Carry out • Water catchment Reports from Salima MoNR – 5 Years
manage vegetation agroforestry, areas well managed collaborating Dedza EA
and cover afforestation, • Rehabilitated area NGOs/ annual Mangochi MoAI
rehabili- revegetation, filling increased Karonga/ DDLGA
tate the up of gullies, Chitipa MoHP
affected development of Chikwawa
catch- protective works or
ments soil conservation
measures, such as
contour bands.
•To •Sensitise the • Develop • Public awareness Surveys/ Bi- MoNR- 5 Years
conduct public through environmental for soil and water annual EA
public radio, field messages to educate conservation MoAI
aware- days and the public on causes improved NGOs
ness publications of environmental Media
campai- degradation and DoI
gns remedial measures

--- Page 60 ---
10
PROG. MEANS OF KEY TIME-
COMPO GOAL OBJEC- STRATEG- ACTIVITIES OUTPUTS VARIFICA- TARGET ACTORS FRAME
NENTS TIVES IES TION AREAS
Water To • Encourage farmers • More farmers Surveys/ Annual MoAI 5 Years
Resour- impr- to use organic adopting use of City Asse-
ces ove manure, and adopt manure mblies
Manage- supply proper methods of
ment and application of
and sanita- fertiliser and
Develop- tion of pesticides.
ment water
(cont’d)
• Promote • Environmental Surveys/ Annual MoWD 5 Years
researched measures pollution minimised EAD
of integrated pest
management.
•To • Enforce legislation •Safe use of Surveys/ annual MoAI 5 Years
improve on handling and chemicals improved Drugs &
handling safety of chemicals. Poisons
of Board
danger- MoWD
ous EAD
chemicals

--- Page 61 ---
11
PROG. MEANS OF KEY TIME-
COMPO GOAL OBJEC- STRATEG- ACTIVITIES OUTPUTS VARIFICA- TARGET ACTORS FRAME
NENTS TIVES IES TION AREAS
Water To •To •Promote low- • Make provision • Households Surveys/ Annual DDLGA 5 Years
Resour- impro encour- cost strategy for rubbish disposal adopting better MoHP,
ces ve age even in the villages. rubbish disposal MoGYCS
Manage- supply proper increased NGOs
ment and methods • Promote uniform • Households MoLH-
and sanita- of waste construction of pit constructing pit PPS
Develop- tion of disposal latrines with San latrines increased EAD
ment water Plat sanitation to
(cont’d) reduce waterborne
diseases
• Train • Entrepreneurs
entrepreneurs in the trained to produce
production of San San Plats increased
Plat latrine blocks

--- Page 62 ---
12
PROG. MEANS OF KEY TIME-
COMPO GOAL OBJEC- STRATEG- ACTIVITIES OUTPUTS VARIFICA- TARGET ACTORS FRAME
NENTS TIVES IES TION AREAS
Water To •To • Promote • Drill more • Increased Reports/ Annual Salima DDLGA 5 Years
Resour- impro increase cost-effective boreholes provision of basic Dedza MoHP
ces ve coverage best available • Exploit available water and sanitation Mangochi NGOs
Manage- supply in technologies surface water services to Karonga/ MoWD
ment and provision and approaches resources communities Chitipa Private
and sanita- of safe •Install hand pumps •Number of cost- Chikwawa Sector
Develop- tion of drinking •Dig shallow wells effective units
ment water water and and upgrade increased
(cont’d) sanitation traditional water
to those sources and
communit sanitation services,
ies which paying particular
have attention to cater for
under- women and children
taken to who are highly
contribute affected.
towards
the
capital
cost of
their
facilities
Water To •To • Package water • Processing and Licences issued/ MBS 5 Years
Resour- impr- increase from springs and marketing of spring Bi-annual MoWD
ces ove sources of sell water into mineral Private
Manage- supply safe water expanded Sector
ment and drinking
and sanita- water
Develop- tion of •To
ment water increase
(cont’d) sources of
Income

--- Page 63 ---
13
PROG. MEANS OF KEY TIME-
COMPO GOAL OBJEC- STRATEG- ACTIVITIES OUTPUTS VARIFICA- TARGET ACTORS FRAME
NENTS TIVES IES TION AREAS
Water To •To • Promote •Construct small • Water harvesting Surveys/ Annual Salima MoWD 5 Years
Resour- impr- increase water dams at household technologies at farm Dedza MoAI
ces ove water harvesting & and community and household Mangochi Private
Manage- supply storage storage levels levels expanded Karonga/ Sector
ment and capacity technologies Chitipa MIRTDC
and sanita- at Chikwawa
Develop- tion of commun-
ment water ity and
(cont’d) house-
hold
levels
•To • Review and revise • Revised water Reports/ Annual MoJ 5 Years
update the current resources Gazette MoWD
legislatio legislation in water management law announcement
n relating resources
to water management so that
resources it matches and acts
managem in accordance with
ent the present water
resources
management and
sanitation
regulations.
•To • Exchange • Better Reports/ Annual MoWD 5 Years
strength- information through coordination MoAI
en effective networking achieved among MoNR-
partner- water EA
ships providers/users Water
between Boards
stake-
holders

--- Page 64 ---
14
PROG. MEANS OF KEY TIME-
COMPO- GOAL OBJECTIVES ACTIVITIES OUTPUTS VARIFICA- TARGET ACTORS FRAME
NENTS TION AREAS
3. To reverse •To promote • Extend the grid and non • Coverage in rural Reports/ annual All districts DoE 5 Years
Renewable over rural grid distribution of areas increased ESCOM
Energy depend- electrification electricity to rural areas Private
ence on Sector
woodfuel •To reduce cost • Encourage the local • Locally-based Reports/ Annual MBS
for energy of appliances manufacturing of energy energy related
and related appropriate appropriate
income. technologies technologies
To produced and
diversify working
energy • Subsidise the cost of • Duty and surtax on
sources cooking and ironing end-use appliances
appliances reduced
•To empower • Establish a revolving • Number of loans Reports/ annual DoE 5 Years
the majority fund issued increased DDLGA
poor • Number of solar MoF
economically to home systems Com-
have easy purchased and mercial
access to installed increased Banks
renewable
energy • Lobby for reduction on • Number of homes
electricity tariffs connected to
electricity increased
•To reduce • Promote energy-related • Energy related DoE 5 Years
dependence on income generating IGAs introduced Reports/ annual Private
woodfuel as a activities Sector
source of NGOs
income

--- Page 65 ---
15
PROG. MEANS OF KEY TIME-
COMPO- GOAL OBJECTIVES ACTIVITIES OUTPUTS VARIFICA- TARGET ACTORS FRAME
NENTS TION AREAS
Renewable To reverse • Introduce projects in • Oil extraction as Reports/Annual Likoma/ MoAI 5 Years
Energy over extraction of edible oils an IGA established Chizumulu DDLGA
(cont’d) depend- and fruit juices. • Juices from Islands, North NABW
ence on • Improve supply of palm indigenous fruits Mzimba SEDOM
woodfuel leaves and bamboos to and woven Rift Valley DEM-
for energy promote handicraft handicrafts Districts ATT
and products. produced and FINCA
income. marketed
To
diversify
energy
sources
•To improve • Promote efficient • Efficient charcoal Surveys/Annual All Districts DoE 5 Years
efficiency in charcoal production production methods Private
production and technologies adopted Sector
use of energy NGOs
resources • Promote improved • Improved charcoal
charcoal cook stoves at cook stoves
household level increased
• Introduce appliances • Coal stoves
that use non-wood introduced
products
•To introduce •Privatise commercial • Number of pine Surveys/Annual DoE 5 Years
sustainable pine charcoal production charcoal producers DoF
charcoal increased NGOs
production
systems • Train charcoal • Hectarage of
producers in reafforestation areas
reafforestation activities increased
• Pressure on
customary land

--- Page 66 ---
16
PROG. MEANS OF KEY TIME-
COMPO- GOAL OBJECTIVES ACTIVITIES OUTPUTS VARIFICA- TARGET ACTORS FRAME
NENTS TION AREAS
forests reduced
Renewable To reverse •To increase the • Provide concessionery • Enterprises in Surveys/ Annual MoF 5 Years
Energy over number of funding for community energy distribution DoE
(cont’d) depend- electricity power producers established and Com-
ence on providers promoted mercial
woodfuel Banks
for energy Private
and Sector
income.
To
diversify
energy
sources
•To enable • Introduce low cost • Number of Reports/ Annual All Districts ESCOM 5 Years
more technologies for electrical households using DoE
households wiring such as prewired low cost technology Private
afford boards, prepaid meters increased Sector
electricity and load limiters. MoF
• Arrange for hire OPC-
purchase systems on end- DoSC
use devises
• Review the policy on • Capital
capital contribution on contribution on
grid connections and national grid
remove it completely removed
•To build • Train professionals in • Trained manpower Reports/Annual DoE 5 Years
capacity of the energy sector and train for managing UNIMA
institutions to technicians and artisans in alternative energy MEDI
manage the energy sector sources increased Mzuzu
alternative Univer-
sources of sity
energy TEVET

--- Page 67 ---
17
PROG. MEANS OF KEY TIME-
COMPO- GOAL OBJECTIVES ACTIVITIES OUTPUTS VARIFICA- TARGET ACTORS FRAME
NENTS TION AREAS
PWD
•To diversify • Promote alternative • Number of Reports/ Annual MIRTDC 5 Years
energy sources sources of energy e.g.. alternative sources DoE
biogas, solar, ethanol- of energy increased
based fuels
PROG. MEANS OF KEY TIME-
COMPO- GOAL OBJECTIVES ACTIVITIES OUTPUTS VARIFICA- TARGET ACTORS FRAME
NENTS TION AREAS
4. To instill •To build local • Train local staff as well • Co-management Reports/ Annual Mangochi DoF 5 Years
Deforest- sense of capacity to as communities on of forest resources Machinga MoAI
ation ownership manage natural participatory forest by communities and Chikwawa NGOs
in people resources management government Mwanza DDLGA
through •Formulate district introduced and Nkhotakota
participa- Afforestation programmes working
tory forest •Forestry education
manage- and campaigns at
ment district level
introduced and
working
•Enforce 10% forest •Forestry policy and
cover for estates laws enforced
•To promote • Promote alternative • Alternative IGAs Reports/ Annual DoF 5 Years
sustainable sources of income introduced to take NGOs
community generating activities off the pressure on WSM
based natural resources Other
forest/natural NGOs
resource • Promote growing of • Number of
management multipurpose trees on established Village

--- Page 68 ---
18
PROG. MEANS OF KEY TIME-
COMPO- GOAL OBJECTIVES ACTIVITIES OUTPUTS VARIFICA- TARGET ACTORS FRAME
NENTS TION AREAS
private farm plots and Forest nurseries
community woodlots increased
• Promote the • Area planted to
establishment of wood lots increased
community wood lots and • Village Forest
private plantations. Areas increased
• Promote development of • Number of nature
school clubs through tree school clubs
planting programmes. increased
• Intensify planting of • Raising of
indigenous fruit trees indigenous fruits in
Village Forest
nurseries promoted
Deforest- To instill •To encourage • Improve markets for • Marketing Surveys and Mangochi DoF 5 Years
ation sense of production and wood products infrastructure for Reports/ Annual Machinga Private
(cont’d) ownership marketing of wood products Chikwawa Sector
in people trees improved Gazette Mwanza
through • Review marketing • Economic value of announcement Nkhotakota
participa- policies to include an natural resources
tory forest environmental component established
manage-
ment
•To increase • Train local people in • Trained Surveys/ Annual DoF 5 Years
knowledge of collection of tree seed and community’s seed Private
communities in identification of best collectors increased Sector
propagation sample trees NHBGM
techniques • Train local people to use • Knowledge of ICRAF
truncheons to grow some vegetative MoAI
tree species propagation of trees NGOs
widespread in

--- Page 69 ---
19
PROG. MEANS OF KEY TIME-
COMPO- GOAL OBJECTIVES ACTIVITIES OUTPUTS VARIFICA- TARGET ACTORS FRAME
NENTS TION AREAS
community
Deforest- To instill •To protect • Carry out afforestation • Tree seed banks Surveys/ Annual DoF 5 Years
ation sense of fragile areas using most suited species, established at NGOs
(cont’d) ownership such as both indigenous and village level NHBGM
in people hillslopes and exotic
through river banks in • Biodiversity on
participa- order to control farm improved
tory forest avalanches and
manage- siltation and • Tree cover in the
ment improve wood landscape improved
supply
•To reduce use • Discourage burnt bricks • Appropriate Surveys/ Annual Mangochi DoF 5 Years
of woodfuel in along the lakeshore and building Machinga DoE
small-scale instead promote cement technologies and Chikwawa MoLH-
industry blocks. energy saving Mwanza PPS
practices adopted Nkhotakota DoF
• Identify and promote • Alternative
suitable alternative sources of energy
sources of energy and for smoking fish
technologies for smoking developed and
fish and domestic use adopted
such as windmills, solar
panels, improved smoking
furnaces, maibawo (solar
cookers) and paper
briquettes

--- Page 70 ---
20
PROG. MEANS OF KEY TIME-
COMPO- GOAL OBJECTIVES ACTIVITIES OUTPUTS VARIFICA- TARGET ACTORS FRAME
NENTS TION AREAS
5 To ensure • To diversify •Identify and encourage •Industrial base •Reports on No. Country wide MIPA, 5 Years
Environ- suitable and raise private sector investment. widened and and types of Dry lands MoTCI
mental safe and contribution of •Train communities in enterpreneurship investments Malawi
Manage- clean other sectors to vocational and promoted •.Reports on No. Chamber
ment environ- the economy employment skills •Over dependency of people of Comm-
ment other than •Encourage investors to on agriculture provided with erce,
agriculture open businesses in dry reduced loans MoGYCS
land areas. •No of people NGOs.
trained
•Reports on No.
and types of
businesses in dry
lands
•To ensure that •Train EIA specialists •Environmental •Reports on No. Country wide EAD, 5 Years
EIAs are carried •Enforce EIA regulations friendly plans of EIA NCE and
out before •Monitor the produced and Specialists other
project implementation of EIA implemented. trained. stake-
implementation. recommendations •EIA reports for holders
projects. such as
•Environmental MIPA
Audit reports. MoWD
City
Assemb-
lies
•To promote •Conduct public •Clean environment •Awareness Country EAD, 5 Years
sustainable awareness on appropriate reports on waste wide. City &
waste waste disposal. disposal. Dry lands. Districts
management in and Town
the urban and •Train communities in •Training reports Assemb-
rural areas. waste recycling. on waste lies.
recycling and

--- Page 71 ---
21
PROG. MEANS OF KEY TIME-
COMPO- GOAL OBJECTIVES ACTIVITIES OUTPUTS VARIFICA- TARGET ACTORS FRAME
NENTS TION AREAS
•Promote waste waste
management based IGAs. management
based IGAs.
•Enforce city bye-laws
and environmental
management
Environ- To ensure •To promote •Train communities in •Communities •Report on No. Country wide EAD 5 Years
mental suitable Community- ENRM-IGAs economically of people trained NGOs
Manage- safe and based •Provide loans for IGAs. empowered. in IGAs & MoGYCS
ment clean Environment •Assist the communities •Sustainable ENRM ENRM. SEDOM
(cont’d) environ- and natural in identifying markets. achieved. •Report on No. DEMATT
ment resources of IGAs. NABW
activities. •Report on No.
of viable
markets.
•To develop •Organise meetings to •Policies in place •Policy Country wide Forestry 5 Years
and implement debate on the existing and implemented. documents Dept.,
appropriate policies. •Policy EAD
policies Implementation Other
regarding •Review the policies. reports. stake-
concession and holders
pricing of NEC
wood; and
management of
natural
resources.
•To strengthen •Train Officers in ENRM. •ENRM activities •Reports on No. Country wide EAD 5 Years
the capacity of •Establish and upgrade effectively of Officers other
EAD as more posts. coordinated and trained and No. stake-
environmental implemented. of posts holders

--- Page 72 ---
22
PROG. MEANS OF KEY TIME-
COMPO- GOAL OBJECTIVES ACTIVITIES OUTPUTS VARIFICA- TARGET ACTORS FRAME
NENTS TION AREAS
coordination established.
agency and •Reports on
other existing effective
institutions to coordination and
effectively implemention.
address
degradation,
desertification
control and
drought
management.
Environ- To ensure •To develop •Identify and develop •Effective and •Report on Country All stake- 5 Years
mental suitable and support all appropriate initiatives for sustainable ENRM appropriate wide. holders
Manage- safe and appropriate ENRM. by the communities initiatives
ment clean initiatives for achieved developed.
(cont’d) environ- community •Train Communities in •Training report
ment participation in appropriate initiatives for on appropriate
environment ENRM. initiatives.
and natural
resources •Provide necessary •Report on types
management. resources to the of resources
communities . provided.
•Encourage already
existing appropriate
community initiatives.

--- Page 73 ---
23
PROG. MEANS OF KEY TIME-
COMPO- GOAL OBJECTIVES ACTIVITIES OUTPUTS VARIFICA- TARGET ACTORS FRAME
NENTS TION AREAS
6. To •To identify •Conduct comprehensive •IKS identified and Reports, visits, Countrywide All 5 Years
Indigenous promote and promote research on IKS utilised demonstrations, Ministries,
Knowledge cultural indigenous •Create awareness on IKS •IKS promoted observations/ UNIMA,
Systems values and knowledge •Evaluate and select IKS Annual NGOs,
and harness relevant to suitable for CCD Private
Techno- the natural •Utilise rural experts in Sector
logies beneficial resources traditional practices in
aspects of conservation training others
indigenous •Develop, in
knowledge
collaboration with
indigenous expertise, new
suitable systems of
biodiversity conservation
•Incorporate indigenous IKS promoted School Countrywide MoEST 5 Years
knowledge in curriculum UNIMA
environmental education
programmes in the school
curriculum

--- Page 74 ---
24
PROG. MEANS OF KEY TIME-
COMPO- GOAL OBJECTIVES ACTIVITIES OUTPUTS VARIFICA- TARGET ACTORS FRAME
NENTS TION AREAS
7. Institu- To •To harmonise •Organise meetings to •Policies in place •Harmonised Countrywide All stake- 5 Years
tional empower existing policies debate on the existing and implemented policy holders
Arrange- local and legislation policies documents
ments communi- in order to •Review the policies
ties promote
community
participation in
natural
resources
management
planning and
decision
making.
PROG. MEANS OF KEY TIME-
COMPO- GOAL OBJECTIVES ACTIVITIES OUTPUTS VARIFICA- TARGET ACTORS FRAME
NENTS TION AREAS
8. Funding To obtain •To identify •Set up and assist sectoral •Sectoral funds, Budget Countrywide MEET, 5 Years
Arrange- sustain- sources of funds, NDF Trust, DDF, Trust funds and statement, MoF,
ments able funding and set and MEET DDF established Financial returns DDLGA,
funding up a sustainable and operational MoNREA
for CCD funding Private
mechanism Sector
•Explore a range of fund •Desertification Financial reports
raising mechanisms activities funded
•Involve donors in Amount of donor Donors
supporting desertification funds pledged
programmes and funded