--- Page 1 ---
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1: INTRODUCTION. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . …………. . . . . . . . 1
1.1 Preamble .……………………………………………………………..………………… 1
1.2 Defining the process .…..…………………………………………………..……….. 1
1.3 Purpose of the report ..…………………………………………………………………1
1.4 Scope of the report ………………………………………………………………………1
1.5 Report preparation process .………………………………………………………. 2
2: DESERTIFICATION IN SWAZILAND ……………………………………………….. 3
2.1 Introduction ………………………………………………………………………………. 3
2.2 Defining desertification ………………………………………………………………. 3
2.3 Desertification status in Swaziland …………………………………………………. 3
2.4 Causes of desertification ……………………………………………………………… 3
2.4.1 Climatic Processes………………………………………………………………………. 4
2.4.2 Topography ……………………………………………………………………………… 4
2.4.3 Population Distribution Pattern ………………………………………………………. 4
2.4.4 Human Activities ………………………………………………………………………. 5
2.4.4.1 Crop Farming Practices ……………………………………………………………….. 5
2.4.4.2 Livestock Farming Practices ………………………………………………………….. 5
2.4.4.3 Road Construction ………………………………………………………………………. 5
2.4.4.4 Indiscriminate ……………………………………………………………………………. 5
2.4.4.5 Deforestation and Afforestration …………………………………………………….. 6
2.4.4.6 Poverty ……………………………………………………………………………………. 6
2.5 Challenges to combating Desertification …………………………………………… 6
3: EXECUTION OF THE NAP PROCESS ………………………………………… 7
3.2 NAP Execution Process ………………………………………………………………. 7
3.2.1 The Consultative Stage ………………………………………………………………… 7
3.2.2 Participation and Execution Stage …………………………………………………… 7
3.3 Specification of Roles and Responsibilities ………………………………………… 7
3.3.1 The NAP………………………………………………………………………………….. 7
3.3.2 The National Steering Committee on Desertification (NSCD) ………………….. 7
3.3.3 Participating Partners and Stakeholders …………………………………………….. 8
3.3.4 Participating International Agencies …………………………………………………. 8
3.3.5 The Focal Point / Secretariat / Co-ordination Unit ……………………………….. 8
3.4 Project initiation and submission procedure ……………………………………….. 9
3.5 Project submission format ……………………………………………………………… 10
3.6 Project approval criteria ………………………………………………………………. 10
3.7 Renumeration…………………………………………………………………………….. 10
3.8 Potential sources of funding............................................................…. 11
4: RESPONSES TO DESERTIFICATION …………………………………………. 13
4.1: Introduction………………………………………………………………………………. 13
4.2: Policy and regulatory responses ………………………………………………………. 13
4.3: Institutional initiatives ………………………………………………………………….. 14
4.4: Current and on-going programmes and project ……………………………………. 14
5: EMERGING ISSUES ……………………………………………………….. 21
5.0 Introduction …………………………………………………………………………….. 21
5.1. Proper Institutional Framework for dealing with Desertification ……………….. 21
5.2. Chieftaincy Disputes ……………………………………………………………………. 21
1

--- Page 2 ---
5.3. Awareness and Capacity Building ………………………………………………….. 21
5.4. Community participation at grass-root level ………………………………………… 22
5.5 Reclamation and rehabilitation of degraded lands …………………………….…… 22
5.6 Sustainable utilisation of land resources …………………………………………..… 22
5.7 Research and technology development ………………………………………………. 22
5.8 Proper siting and construction of infrastructure ……………………………………. 22
5.9 Tree Cutting and Indiscriminate Land Clearing ……………………………………. 23
5.10 Improvement of Livestock management practices…………………………………. 23
5.11 Drought Mitigation and Poverty Alleviation …………………………………….… 23
5.12 Land Use Policy …………………………………………………………………………. 23
5.13 Settlement and resettlement ……………………………………………………………. 23
5.14 Population Policy ……………………………………………………………………….. 24
6: IMPLEMENTATION OF THE NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMME …. 25
6.1 Introduction ……………………………………………………………………………... 25
6.2 The guiding principles…………………………………………………………………….. 25
6.3 The programme strategy ……………………………………………………………….. 25
6.4. Detailed description of Programme areas …………………………………………… 25
6.4.1 Institutional Arrangements ……………………………………………………………… 25
6.4.2 Chieftaincy Disputes …………………………………………………………………….. 26
6.4.3 Promotion of awareness and capacity building……………………………………… 28
6.4.4 Promotion of Active Participation of Community in Land Management
Programmes ………………………………………………………………………………. 28
6.4.5 Reclamation and rehabilitation of degraded land to promote sustainable
utilisation of land resources …………………………………………………………… 28
6.4.6 Formulation of a national forestry policy and exploitation of forest products
framework …………………………………………………………………………………… 29
6.4.7 Research and Technology ………………………………………………………………. 29
6.4.8 Proper location of construction sites and physical infrastructure.………………… 30
6.4.9 Development of alternative energy sources ………………………………………….. 30
6.4.10 Improvement of livestock management practices ………………………………… 30
6.4.11 Drought mitigation and poverty alleviation strategies …………………………….. 31
6.4.12 Land Use Policy ………………………………………………………………………… 32
6.4.13 Settlement and Resettlement Policy ………………………………………………….. 34
6.4.14 Population Policy ……………………………………………………………………….. 34
LIST OF REFERENCES. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
2

--- Page 3 ---
LIST OF ACRONYMS
BSAP Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan
CBOs Community based organisations
CCD Convention to Combat Desertification
CRDB Central Rural Development Board
DPM Deputy Prime Minister
EIAs Environmental Impact Assessments
ESRA Economic and Social Reform Agenda
FAO Food and Agricultural Organisation
FCCC Framework Convention on Climate Change
FLAS Family Life Association of Swaziland
IFAD International Foundation for Agricultural Development
GMDA Grazing land Management Demonstration Areas
KOBWA Komati Basin Water Authority
LUPS Land Use Planning Section
MEPD Ministry of Economic Planning and Development
MHSW Ministry of Health and Social Welfare
MHUD Ministry of Housing and Urban Development
MNRE Ministry of Natural Resources and Energy
MOAC Ministry of Agriculture and Co-operatives
NAP National Action Programme
NDF National Desertification Fund
NDS National Development Strategy
NEF National Environment Fund
NEEP National Environmental Education Programme
NGO Non-governmental Organisation
NPC National Population Council
NSCD National Steering Committee on Desertification
RDAP Rural Development Areas Programme
RSA Republic of South Africa
SADC-ELMS Southern African Development Co-operation, Environment and Land Management Sector
SEA Swaziland Environment Authority
SEAP Swaziland Environmental Action Plan
SFDF Swaziland Farmers' Development Foundation
SNL Swazi Nation Land
SNTC Swaziland National Trust Commission
SWSC Swaziland Water Services Corporation
UNDP United Nations Development Programme
UNEP United Nations Environment Programme
UNICEF United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund
UNISWA University of Swaziland
UNSO United Nations Special Office for Combating Desertification
3

--- Page 4 ---
LIST OF TABLES
Table 1: Population density in Swaziland ....................…………………………………………………. .4
Table 4.1: On-going government programmes addressing the issue of desertification in the country ... 16
Table 4.2: On-going projects under the auspices of NGOs ..……................…...................…..… 17
4

--- Page 5 ---
1.0 INTRODUCTION
1.1 Preamble
The Kingdom of Swaziland is experiencing formidable challenges of addressing land degradation and
desertification problems. These problems are experienced within the context of a rapid population increase,
worsening poverty and progressive increase in the utilisation of environment and land resources. Presently,
almost half (49 percent) of the total land is vulnerable to desertification. Moreover, more than half (55 percent)
of total communal rangelands have experienced a sharp decline in their productivity. The semi - arid portion
estimated at 26 percent of the total land area is consistently experiencing drought conditions which render the
soil vulnerable to erosion (Downing and Zuke, 1997).
The government of Swaziland, as a signatory to the International Convention to Combat Desertification (CCD),
with the assistance of the United Nations Office for Desertification, is making significant headway towards
meeting its obligations under the convention. The preparation of the National Action Plan (NAP) is a
culmination of several activities undertaken by government towards the implementation of the Convention. The
NAP prepares the stage where local partner signatories to the convention are invited to contribute their
assistance and initiatives in the implementation of the convention.
1.2 Defining the process
The NAP is one of the essential implementation tools of the CCD and its production is guided by the principles
set by Article 3 of the CCD. Collectively, the principles stress the importance of consultation and participation
in the implementation of the CCD. The NAP preparation process began with community and regional
consultations aimed at sharpening awareness among the various stakeholders. The second stage was the holding
of the National Forum to formulate priorities. The writing of the NAP is, therefore, partly a product of the
consultative and participatory fora held with local stakeholders.
1.3 Purpose of the report
This document is the National Action Programme which details a strategy and programmes aimed at the
implementation of the CCD. The programmes provide mechanisms and windows of opportunities whereby
interested partners make submissions of projects designed to address problems of land degradation and
desertification. The NAP is important in a number of ways. Firstly, it provides a framework for the
implementation of the CCD. Secondly, the implementation of CCD programmes and activities has the potential
of addressing other socio - economic problems such as poverty, which is consistent with government's major
goal of poverty alleviation. Thirdly, the NAP offers opportunities of highlighting land degradation and
desertification issues incorporated within the long - term National Development Strategy (NDS) and the short -
term Economic and Social Reform Agenda (ESRA). Lastly, the NAP acts as a framework for the mobilisation
of local initiatives, resources and skills crucial in the translation of the convention into action.
1.4 Scope of the report
This document will confine itself to the setting out of the implementation strategy to facilitate the mounting of
combating desertification activities within local communities. Essentially, the components have been presented
in terms of their objectives, outputs, activities, relevance to other programmes, institutional framework for
implementation, time frame, cost estimate, sources of funding. In the selection of the programme components
linkages with other programmes were sought. For instance, linkages with programmes on good governance,
poverty alleviation and sustainable livelihoods.
It must be noted that the format of this report is quite a departure from other government reports where stated
goals, budgets and resources are known before hand and are within the control of the agencies. The NAP
programme goals, budgets and resources will be more or less estimates and approximations since NAP relies on
the initiative of the prospective partners who may conduct their affairs and activities within their own budget
and time constraints. In essence, this report shall not prescribe to prospective partners how to conduct their
affairs. Instead it provides an enabling framework of encouraging, supporting, and promoting desires of its
partners through activity and policy decisions within its structures. This report will also not venture into
technical matters and activities of any nature in its attempt to facilitate the achievement of partners' desires
within the NAP.
5

--- Page 6 ---
1.5 Report preparation process
Since the beginning of the 1990s there has been documentation of issues and concerns related to the
environment. There has also been documentation of proceedings of workshops, seminars,
conferences/conventions and meetings on environmental issues, particularly on land degradation and
desertification. The NAP report is a product of the analysis of most of these documents and it has benefited
from insights of various informants \ stakeholders through community workshops, meetings and National
Foram.
6

--- Page 7 ---
2.0 DESERTIFICATION IN SWAZILAND
2.1 Introduction
This section intends to expose the desertification problem in Swaziland with an aim of putting the NAP into
context. The section opens by defining desertification and present a brief exposition of the environmental state
in the country. Lastly, an elaborate, but not conclusive overview on the causes of desertification in Swaziland is
presented.
2.2 Defining desertification
Desertification is generally regarded as the degradation of land especially in arid, semi - arid and dry sub -
humid climatic regions as a result of human and climatic processes. It is quite common for desertification to be
understood interchangeably with land degradation. Locally the two may imply similar processes, while ideally
land degradation has to do with a decline or loss of productive capacity of a piece of land due to human
activities and habitation patterns.
2.3 Desertification status in Swaziland
The magnitude of desertification in the country is not comparable with other sub - Saharan African countries
where large portions of their territories have been rendered unsuitable or unproductive for human occupation.
Presenting the extent of desertification in Swaziland is a difficult task especially in the absence of
documentation assessing the extent of land degradation and technology used to combat desertification. As a
result, the discussion will be confined to a limited number of variables which include soil erosion, biomass
productivity, bush encroachment and use of farm chemicals.
It has been estimated that more than half (55%) of all communal grazing land is seriously or very seriously
eroded. Although there are differences in the magnitude of soil erosion from one physiographic region to
another, the rate of soil erosion and land degradation is increasing in almost all the regions. It has been estimated
that severe soil erosion in the Middleveld has doubled in the last 25 years and this trend is likely to continue
(Mushala et. al., 1995). Consequently, more than half of the grazing land is degraded and suffer a noticeable
decline in productivity. About 55% of pasture land can hardly produce 100 kilograms of dry matter per hectare
(Downing and Zuke, 1996). This productivity estimate may be meaningless without a statement on the
optimum productivity of pastures. There is also the problem of bush encroachment which is prevalent in the
lower middleveld and the lowveld. Intensive use of farming chemicals further encourages land degradation
through soil acidification. Currently, the use of soil acidifying nitrogen - based fertilisers is quite high (Central
Statistical Bulletin, 1989/90).
2.4 Causes of desertification
Factors causing desertification and land degradation are numerous and they do not operate in isolation. The
magnitude of the causes of desertification vary with the level of socio - economic development and resilience of
the physical environment. Desertification is fundamentally a result of the depletion and removal of vegetation
cover that protects the soil from agents of erosion and the loss of soil moisture to the atmosphere. The depletion
of vegetation is commonly attributed to human activities including settlement patterns. Climatic processes,
especially drought also contribute to loss of vegetation.
Downing and Zuke (1996) have put causes of desertification into two categories namely; natural climatic causes
and socio - economic causes. In this report, the causes are sub-divided into four categories. The categorisation is
based on causes that are related to (i) climatic processes , (ii) topography, (iii) human habitation patterns
(population distribution in the country) and (iv) human activities.
2.4.1 Climatic Processes
The variability of climatic conditions, especially rainfall quantity, is a major natural cause of desertification. For
example, the drought incidence in the first half of the 1990s had adverse impact on land productivity. To a large
extent the amount of rainfall received countrywide was inadequate for vegetation to thrive. Considering that the
physiographic regions of the country experience different climatic conditions, drought incidences also vary
within Swaziland. The magnitude of land degradation also follows a similar pattern.
7

--- Page 8 ---
The effects of drought are largely felt in the lowveld region of Swaziland which is characterised by an
unreliable mean rainfall of less than 500 mm per year. This cannot support much vegetation growth especially
under the characteristic hot temperature conditions which cause evapotranspiration to be in excess of the rainfall
received. Therefore, continuous drought incidences in this region may soon result in complete destruction of the
vegetation cover, exposing the soil to erosion agents. Based on climatic conditions, the lowveld region is most
prone to desertification and the conditions improves towards the highveld region.
2.4.2 Topography
The general relief of the country varies from high altitudes in the highveld to gentle sloping terrain in the
lowveld. Topography often works in conjunction with other factors, especially climatic conditions and the
susceptibility of the soil to erosion. The mean annual rainfall amount increases substantially from 500 mm/year
in the lowveld to 1500 mm/year in the highveld. Humid conditions in the highveld and upper middleveld
promote a vigorous growth of grass and other types of vegetation. On the other hand, the humid conditions also
facilitate the removal of loose soil material down slope. The rugged nature and steep slopes of the highveld and
middleveld increases the erosive potential of surface run-off . Most types of soils in Swaziland are highly
susceptible to erosion, especially the highly weathered ferrosols, with a thin saprolite. A large body of the
ferralsols are found in the highveld and upper middleveld. The soils in the highveld and middleveld are also
characterised by shallow depths which restricts the growth of vegetation, particularly trees. As a result, the
highveld and upper middleveld experience massive gully formations along steep slopes.
2.4.3 Population Distribution Pattern
In reviewing human habitation patterns, it is important to consider the population size, its growth rate and
distribution in relation to available land resources throughout the country. There is a considerable increase in
population density in the country. For instance, the national population density increased from 21.6 people per
km2 in 1966 to 39.2 people per km2 in 1986 (Census Report vol. 4, 1986). This does not imply that the
population is evenly distributed throughout the country. Some areas are more settled than others due to several
factors. One of the most important factors is land tenure. With the exception of urban areas, SNL is the most
densely populated area of all tenure systems in Swaziland (Table 1). Of the approximately 66% of the total
Swazi population in rural areas, a large proportion is on SNL which accounts for only 59% of the total surface
area (17 000 km2) of the country.
TABLE 1 POPULATION DENSITY IN SWAZILAND ACCORDING TO AREA AND TENURE
AREA / TENURE AREA (Km2) POPULATION DENSITY/ Km2
Swazi Nation Land 10 298.7 683 244 66.3
Freehold Title Deed 5 009.0 76 073 15.2
Gazetted Urban Areas 185.7 138 559 74..6
Company Towns 1 801.6 82 844 46.0
On SNL, where population density is high, there is intensive utilisation of land and environmental resources.
This may proceed to reach levels where the resources are depleted beyond a possibility of regeneration. As such,
the total surface area of Swaziland cannot support the rapidly growing Swazi population. Since the land
resources are finite this creates a disequilibrium between demand for land and its supply. Often, marginal land is
brought into cultivation and settlement and large portions of virgin land are cleared of vegetation cover to make
available spaces for cultivation and settlement. Land resources in densely populated areas may also be made
available through land sub - division (land fragmentation). Intensive land fragmentation results in ever reduced
sizes of land holdings. This may continue until the sizes of land holdings become unsustainable. On SNL where
farming is undertaken with limited capital and technological inputs, the decrease in land size leads to intensive
land utilisation and a reduced fallow period. This continues until the soil becomes unproductive. Consequently,
population growth and distribution culminate in land degradation and desertification.
2.4.4 Human Activities
8

--- Page 9 ---
Several human activities cause land degradation. The degradation of land is attributed to unsustainable land
management practices in agriculture, forestry, mining and construction. These activities result in either chemi-
cal, biological or physical degradation of the land due to loss of soil nutrients, organic matter, flora, fauna and
the destruction of the soil structure. Accumulations of trace elements also contribute to land degradation. The
degraded land cannot support vegetation growth and this leads to exposure of the soil to erosion agents such as
wind and heavy rainfall.
2.4.4.1 Crop Farming Practices
A majority of rural Swazis are subsistence farmers, with comparatively small land holdings. There is low
technological and capital input into farming yet the continuous cultivation of the soil restricts the regeneration of
nutrients and structure. Incidents of inappropriate cropping and farming practices as well as poor soil / land
management systems are prevalent. Likewise, problems of land degradation have been recorded among farming
communities on TDL. Incidents of improper application of fertilisers, herbicides and insecticides have been
documented in all farming systems in the country together with their adverse effects on the soil nutrient
composition and structure.
9

--- Page 10 ---
2.4.4.2 Livestock Farming Practices
Swazis are traditionally and predominantly livestock farmers. Livestock grazing is inevitably the largest land
use occupying about 67 percent of the country s total surface area (SEAP vol. 1 :33). Emphasis is normally
placed on the quantity of livestock one should raise and not necessarily on the quality of the beasts. This makes
pastoral farming more of a social than an economic practice, particularly on SNL. Grazing on SNL is communal
and indiscriminate without any control on livestock numbers that can be grazed on the pastures. In 1992
Swaziland, with a livestock population of 700 000, was already beyond the recommended carrying capacity for
sustained yield yet her stocking rate of 2.6 hectares per livestock is among the highest in Africa (Osunade, 1994;
SEAP, 1998). Consistent with the high stocking rates is overgrazing. As a result of overgrazing, grass in some
communal grazing areas fails to grow leaving bare patches of unproductive soil. The destruction of vegetation
cover is compounded by night kraaling and the movement of livestock to dipping tanks and watering points.
This does not only destroy the grass cover, it also creates rills which facilitate surface run-off and erosion of soil
material loosened by livestock trampling. Soil erosion and land degradation in Swaziland is most extensive in
communal grazing areas, especially around dipping tanks and watering points. On TDL, the most prevalent
problem is bush encroachment which is generally caused by low stocking densities.
2.4.4.3 Road Construction
Improper siting of roads and storm drainage channels also promote land degradation. Roads and their drainage
channels encourage surface run - off. If sited without in-depth slope and site analysis, this may prove
catastrophic to the environment. Drainage channels of most rural roads are constructed solely to collect rain
water from the roads with little concern on how the water will eventually be disposed. Serious gully erosion
takes place on land portions along the roads.
2.4.4.4 Indiscriminate Use of Fire
There is a high incidence of uncontrolled use of fires in the country. Fire is sometimes used to facilitate pasture
regeneration and also in clearing vegetation for farming and settlements. In most cases the fire is used at a
wrong time. For instance, veld burning; which is common in rural communities, is done during the winter
season when the grass and soil are very dry. The fire destroys not only the leaves but it penetrates the sub- soil
and destroys the root structure of plants. When the rainy season comes the vegetation fails to grow thus denying
the soil of the important protection against erosion agents. Failure of vegetation to grow signals the onset of
desertification.
2.4.4.5 Deforestation and Afforestation
Deforestation has to do with indiscriminate cutting of trees. Tree cutting incidents are common on SNL, par-
ticularly where land is being cleared for cultivation and settlements. This becomes a problem when accompa-
nied by the utilisation of trees for fuelwood and building purposes. Afforestation may be as detrimental as
deforestation especially if water - depleting tree species are planted. Eucalyptus trees and other types of trees
with a high water demand deplete ground water if planted on a large scale and close to water sources. The
vertical structure and chemical components of some of the trees used in afforestation programmes may also
result in the destruction of the undergrowth which protects the soil from splash erosion. Detailed tree
species/site analysis need to be undertaken in afforestation programmes to avoid the negative effects.
10

--- Page 11 ---
2.4.4.5 Poverty
Poverty stricken people tend to rely heavily on the exploitation of natural resources for their livelihood. As such
they are the most vulnerable group to the exploitation of natural resources. This is exemplified by the intensive
exploitation of indigenous trees for firewood for sale to individuals and butchery owners along the country's
major roads. Moreover, a majority (75 - 90%) of rural Swazi households rely on wood for fuel. Depletion of
indigenous forests for fuelwood, building, wood carving and furniture - making takes place within poverty
stricken communities. Lasschuit (1994), estimates that total wood consumption in rural communities exceeds
the total sustainable wood supply by 30 percent. This occurs in a situation where there is lack of management
systems for indigenous forests.
2.5 Challenges to Combating Desertification
There are several challenges to be overcome in the implementation of initiatives to combat desertification.
These challenges include the rapidly growing population, a declining economy and stagnating food production.
Other challenges are unsustainable increases in livestock numbers within rapidly degrading communal grazing
areas. Poverty is also a major socio - economic challenge to combating desertification. Persistent application of
improper farming systems and land management practices as well as the limited capacity of communities to
address desertification and land degradation problems is another challenge that may impede the success of
initiatives to combat desertification.
11

--- Page 12 ---
3: EXECUTION OF THE NAP PROCESS
3.1 Introduction
This section specifies the process of the implementation of the NAP. Roles and responsibilities of players in the
execution of the NAP are stated. There is also a suggested format of project presentation and project approval
criteria. Lastly, there is a section on funding of combating desertification projects and other activities.
3.2 NAP Execution Process
The basic principles of the NAP are founded on consultations and participation. Suggested here is a simple
two-staged process for the execution of the NAP which ensures that the principles and priorities set in the First
National Forum on Desertification are fulfilled.
3.2.1 The Consultative Stage
The consultative stage began with the appointment of the NSCD which is composed of representatives of the
private sector, government departments, NGOs and the university. The NSCD together with the focal point has
undertaken a series of activities towards the production of the NAP document.
The activities include;
(i) awareness raising activities on the CCD,
(ii) community and regional training workshops and meetings on issues pertaining to the NAP and
(iii) National Forums on the NAP
Consultation with stakeholders will be an on-going process but the implementation of the NAP will commence
after approval by Cabinet.
3.2.2 Participation and Execution Stage
This process commences after the NAP document has received Cabinet approval. Thereafter, prospective
partners will be invited to make formal submissions of projects consistent with the proposed NAP programme
areas. Projects will be submitted to the Steering committee for approval, funding and other kind of support
which may include technical and training assistance. All sectors of the society, including all NGOs, government
departments and agencies, associations, communities and individuals are free to submit projects . The project
submission format is presented in section 3.5.
3.3 Specification of Roles and Responsibilities
The implementation of the NAP will involve a wide spectrum of stakeholders. The specification of roles and
responsibilities is crucial to minimise confusion emanating from overlap and duplication of activities. This
enhances efficient co-ordination of activities undertaken by the various stakeholders.
3.3.1 The NAP
The NAP proposes programmes for implementation under the CCD. These programmes also form part of the
SEAP policy document. Since the CCD is related to other conventions such as the CBD and FCCC, the NAP
recognises the importance of other initiatives within the framework of the relevant conventions.
3.3.2 The National Steering Committee on Desertification (NSCD)
The responsibility of this committee is predominantly decision - making and influencing policy on
desertification issues. Its major task is to facilitate and promote the formulation and submission of projects, and
to oversee the implementation of projects by interested parties. The committee shall periodically, compile
existing projects and suggest a menu of viable projects for execution. In addition, the committee may offer
assistance, upon request by prospective partners, in the initiation and design of projects. Using a specified
criteria, the Committee shall be responsible for the approval of projects submitted by participating stakeholders.
3.3.3 Participating Partners and Stakeholders
12

--- Page 13 ---
This is a composition of all governmental and non-governmental agencies, NGOs, community groups and in-
dividuals interested in combating desertification. The participating partners and stakeholders shall initiate and
design their own projects. They shall also be responsible for the execution of the projects once they have been
approved. This is an independent exercise undertaken by the stakeholders using the participatory approach.
They may solicit assistance from the Committee, but they are not obliged. Specified goals in their projects shall
be based on needs and priorities and be in accordance with the overall goals of the CCD and the execution of
the NAP.
3.3.4 Participating International Agencies
· UNDP-UNSO: Provides strategic guidance, technical backstopping, monitoring and reports to
donors on supported projects.
· UNDP Country Office: The country office is responsible for the management and administrative
follow-up on project implementation, monitoring and reporting for those projects funded by UN
agencies.
· IFAD: Houses the Global Mechanism which has been established by the Conference of parties and
is responsible for mobilising funds to ensure the effectiveness and efficiency of existing financial
resources in tackling desertification issues in afffected developing countries.
· UNEP: Co-operates with UNDP and the World Bank in the implementation of the Global
Environment Facility. The Global Environment Facility provides grants and concessional funds to
developing for projects and activities that aim at protecting the environment. UNEP also works
jointly with UNSO on cross-cutting issues including information exchange and research.
· CCD Secretariat: Responsible for arranging sessions of the conference of the parties. In addition,
the secretariat has to compile and transmit reports and facilitate assistance to affected developing
country Parties as well as coordinating all CCD activities.
3.3.5 The Focal Point / Secretariat / Co-ordination Unit
A co-ordination unit will be established to serve as the secretariat and focal point for all CCD activities in
Swaziland. This shall not be a one person responsibility as it was the case in the preparatory stages of the NAP.
The Unit shall be composed of a Programme Manager (currently the focal point) and four Programme Officers
(or Programme Assistant Managers). In the proposed structure the Unit will be an interface between prospective
participants (stakeholders) mainly at community levels, the Steering committee and SEA. This structure will
avoid the creation of numerous ministerial or sectorial committees. The unit shall be accorded all the necessary
facilities (including transport) and based preferably in the Ministry of Agriculture and Co-operatives, Land Use
Section or within the SEA structure in the Ministry of Communications, Tourism and Environment. All officers
of the Unit shall be full-time public servants with specific minimum qualifications as suggested below. At least
one of the officers must be a female to facilitate strengthening of the role of women in the implementation of the
convention.
The Programme Manager
· Postgraduate degree in Soil Science, Environmental Science, Environmental Education, Land Use
Planning, Physical Geography, Agricultural Engineering and any other relevant qualification.
· More than five years experience in Land utilisation, Land Use Planning and Conservation.
· Must have been involved in CCD or Land Degradation activities.
· Possess a valid driver’s licence.
The Programme Officers / Programme Assistant Managers
· First degree preferably in Environmental Science, Land Use Planning , Geography or Sociology.
· Experience in working with communities and NGOs.
13

--- Page 14 ---
· Possess a valid driver’s licence.
This unit shall co-ordinate the implementation of the NAP and provide continuity on long-term NAP
programme activities. The Unit, shall on behalf of the NSCD, facilitate invitation and submission of projects
from stakeholders. The officers shall periodically visit communities and organisations to monitor progress on
the implementation of CCD projects and activities and to offer assistance and advise where needed. The Unit
shall also liaise with relevant agencies, such as SADC ELMS and UNDP-UNSO for purposes of reporting,
information sharing and other matters related to the implementation of CCD projects. The unit shall act as an
information centre to facilitate collection and dissemination of information among the stakeholders. The specific
roles of the officers are outlined below:
The Programme Manager
The officer shall work full-time on promoting the activities of the Convention with the following duties:
These officers shall work on a full- time basis on CCD activities. They shall work closely with the Programme
Manager who shall periodically delegate duties to them. They shall perform the following duties:
· Execute recommendations of the NSCD.
· Be in-charge of the Co-ordination Untit and liaise with other relevant institutions.
· Provide administrative support for the execution of the NAP.
· Be a secretary (non-voting) in all NSCD meetings.
· Make administrative decisions on behalf of the NSCD for decision making.
· Compile and present project proposal to the NSCD on the performance on NAP
programmes and activities.
· Issue invitation of project submission to all stakeholders on behalf of the NSCD.
· And any other duties that may be assigned by the NSCD in consultation with the SEA and
other relevant departments.
3.4 Project initiation and submission procedure
A framework for project initiation shall not be suggested because project initiation is solely the prerogative of
the stakeholders/prospective participants. The framework below, however, offers some guidelines on the
submission of projects.
· Stakeholders in consultation with affected communities identify desertification problems and
design projects of their own choice, but consistent with the CCD programmes.
· The project Manager, on behalf of the NSCD, invites stakeholders to submit projects worthy of
consideration.
· The stakeholders then make submission of project proposals (see submissions format in section
3.5) to Project Assistants for registration in the Co-ordination Unit.
· The Project Manager compiles the proposals and formally register and submit them to the NSCD
for deliberations.
· The NSCD, guided by specific criteria (section 3.6), select and approve projects deserving
implementation.
· Approved projects are then forwarded to relevant organisations and agencies (partners for
cooperation, funding and technical assistance.
· The relevant agency/partner and the Co-ordination Unit, through the project Assistants, monitor
the implementation of projects and submit periodical progress reports for technical appraisal and
evaluation.
3.5 Project submission format
It is important that projects are submitted in a uniform format. This allows for a consistent assessment by the
NSCD when it comes to projects approval. The format includes the following items:
· Name of the agency/organisation/individual and (contact) address.
· Project title/theme.
· Outline of aim and objects.
· The geographic location of the project.
14

--- Page 15 ---
· Identification of participating communities/villages or individuals in the execution of the
work or activities.
· Plan of project activities.
· Material resources required.
· Execution /implementation time frame.
· Breakdown of required funds including other sources such as those generated locally by
communities, participating partners and from potential donors.
3.6 Project approval criteria
While the decision to approve or not to approve a project is the prerogative of the NSCD, it may however
consider the following factors in its project proposals assessment:
· Seriousness of the land degradation /desertification problem to be addressed.
· Feasibility of the project in terms of resource availability for implementation as well as its
potential to address the identified problem.
· Contribution of the proposed project activies to socio-economic activities, particularly
poverty alleviation.
· Consult with the criteria set out in Article 11 of SEAP vol.1.
3.7 Renumeration and funding
The NAP is produced entirely to guide and ensure the successful implementation of the CCD in Swaziland. The
execution of the NAP on long-term and sustainable basis requires the availability of funds not only to support
the project initiatives but also to encourage and sustain the momentum of various role players towards the
implementation of the CCD in the country. The NAP suggest the creation of a renumeration and funding facility
for role players and projects within the NAP structure. These include the NSCD, the Co-ordination Unit,
Community committees and NGOs.
3.7.1 The NSCD
While this committee is representative of all stakeholders, it would be false to hope that their participation in
committee deliberations would be sustained over a long time without renumerative incentives. A renumerative
facility may have to be established on the lines of sitting allowances to encourage and sustain the momentum
among the NSCD members irrespective of the organisation from where they are drawn.
3.7.2 The Co-ordination Unit
Officers of the Unit shall work on full - time basis exclusively on activities related to combating desertification.
Funds must be made available to pay their salaries consistent with government salary format. Sources of this
line of funding may be solicited from co-operating international agencies such as the UNDP. The government
may also establish this structure within an existing ministry or department and create the necessary posts and
make budget arrangements.
3.7.3 Regional committees
These are involved in the identification and execution of project activities which may include tree planting,
stone collection, construction of embankments and many others. Regional committees have an important role to
play in assisting communities to identify and execute project activities. They also play a pivotal role in ensuring
the success of the NAP within their regions. A line of funding which can be easily incorporated into the entire
project budget as personnel or technical costs needs to be explored to cater for the regional committees.
3.8 Potential sources of funding
3.8.1 Government
15

--- Page 16 ---
Government is expected to play the catalytic role in the funding of activities to combat desertification. In
addition it is expected to take a lead in the mobilisation of resources from donors and other sources.
3.8.2 UNDP-UNSO
This organisation has played a major role in the mobilisation of funds for the initiation of CCD activities in the
country. It is hoped that it will continue to do so even during the implementation phase.
3.8.3 The Global mechanism
This is an institution established by the Conference of Parties to assist developing country parties in their efforts
of mobilising resources for the implementation of the convention. It is thus expected to collaborate with
government in the sourcing of funds for CCD activities.
3.8.4 UNEP
This organisation has pledged its willingness to support the implementation of the convention through provision
of financial and technical support to developing country parties.
3.8.4 CCD Secretariat
As an overall coordinating institution of the convention the Secretariat will be expected to come to the rescue of
parties in times of need especially when it comes to resource mobilisation and technical backstopping.
3.8.5 National Desertification Fund (NDF) / National Environmental Fund (NEF)
The Convention recommends that signatory nations create a special fund to provide financial resources for
combating desertification activities. The government of Swaziland is in a process of initiating a broad - based
national environmental fund to deal with the entire environmental issues not desertification alone, as it is the
case with the NDF. The NEF is preferred mainly to avoid excessive logistics and red tape associated with small
separate funds serving more or less similar goals. Financing of the NEF would be derived from taxes imposed
on commercial projects associated with environmental exploitation.
3.8.6 Private Sector Funding
The private sector recognises its responsibility in the overall development of the country including protection of
its environment. However, its willingness to contribute to environment related funds is discouraged by past
experiences where such noble funds were initiated only to be abandoned immediately. The private sector need
government assurance and guarantee on survival of such a fund to encourage its effective contribution.
Moreover, the private sector would like to have a say in the management of the fund.
4.0 RESPONSES TO DESERTIFICATION
4.1 Introduction
Combating desertification goes beyond the recognition of the existence, causes and effects of desertification.
There is need to respond to the problem in a positive and sustainable manner. Various institutions whose
activities relate to desertification either positively or negatively need to be engaged in the process. These
institutional initiatives could be in the form of programmes or projects. Success of the initiated projects or
programmes can only be realised if appropriate policy and legislative instruments are in place. This Section
examines how the government of Swaziland and other institutions have responded to the issue of desertification.
The Section looks at the institutional initiatives in the form of on-going programmes or projects and the policy
and regulatory responses associated with these programmes.
16

--- Page 17 ---
4.2 Policy and regulatory responses
Effective policies and legislation are essential for the success of any programme because they guide and
facilitate the achievement of the set goals. Several policies and regulations have been drafted over the years.
Some of these do address the issue of land degradation in the country. Amongst the policies that were meant to
address issues of land degradation is the
¨ Forest Preservation Act of 1910. This Act restricts forest clearance and the cutting of trees on Swazi Nation
Land and land leased to Government as outlined in Section 3 of the Act.
¨ The Natural Resources Act (1951) and the King's Order in Council of 1954 which led to the establishment
of the Central Rural Development Board (CRDB) also address aspects of land degradation.
¨ Related to the activities of the CRDB is the Swazi Nation Act (1961) which controls land use in rural areas.
¨ In 1972, the Control of Tree Planting Act was established. This Legislation gives the Ministry of
Agriculture and the Natural Resources Board the mandate to designate tree control areas on agricultural
land.
¨ Orderly development of urban and rural settlements is controlled by the Human Settlement Act of 1989 as
amended in 1992. Although there are extensive policies and regulations regarding the use of natural
resources in the country, a number of problems have been experienced. These problems include duplication,
poor implementation and lack of enforcement of existing policies. The National Action Programme must
solicit means of consolidating duplicated policies and strategies to avoid such occurrences in the future.
Since (1992) the implementation and enforcement of policies and regulations is a mandate of the Swaziland
Environment Authority as contained in the SEA Act (1992). Amongst the achievements of the SEA is the
formulation of the Environmental Impact Assessment Regulations and Procedures (1996). This policy
instrument is meant to address inappropriate siting of infrastructure and mitigate effects on the environment.
These regulations and procedures are being revised to emphasise on the social aspects of EIAs. The second
achievement has been the preparation and completion of the Swaziland. Environmental Action Plan (SEAP).
The SEAP defines plans and actions that will ensure sustainable use of natural resources in the country. Within
the SEAP, issues that are relevant to combating desertification are mainly covered under natural resource
management. Other relevant sectors include the biodiversity, energy and forestry sectors. In 1998, the SEA
engaged a national co-ordinator to facilitate the formulation of the Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan
(BSAP). The BSAP is now complete and awaiting Cabinet approval. In June 1997, drafting of the National
Land Policy was launched by the Honourable Minister of Natural Resources and Energy. This policy is still
under review. Part of this policy initiative is the drafting and review of the Rural Land Policy to address matters
such as rural land tenure and overall resource management.
As a follow-up activity to the Earth Summit held in Rio de Jenerio in 1992, government initiated the National
development strategy in 1994. The main features of the NDS is the incorporation of environmental concerns in
the development initiatives of the country. The NDS also highlights or reflects the national policy instruments.
In 1997, the Prime Minister's Office initiated the Economic and Social Reform Agenda (ESRA) and is now in
its second phase. Under ESRA, policies in the areas of population, water conservation, rural settlement, social
welfare, housing and gender are under review or being drafted.
4.3: Institutional initiatives
Issues of land degradation in the country have been cause for concern since the colonial period. Measures to
control soil erosion in the country started in the 1940s with the introduction of grass strips by extension workers.
A total of 113 780km of grass strips were laid out by the extension workers between 1940 and 1960. In 1951,
the Natural Resources Board was established by the Natural Resources Act. This board was commissioned to
supervise the use of natural resources in the country, except on SNL. This was followed by the formation of the
Central Rural Development Board (CRDB) by the King's Order in Council in 1954. The CRDB was charged
with resettlement, the division of all SNL into arable and grazing areas and the management of the nations'
natural resources. As a consequent to the formation of the CRDB, local conservation or development
committees (Imisumphe) were established. However, due to conflicts with chiefs and basic ingredients of
operations these became inefficient (Osunade, 1994 (b)).
In 1970, the RDAP was established with funding from the United Kingdom. The programme was extended in
1976 with bilateral aid from West Germany, Sweden and Canada and multilateral aid from the World Bank,
African Development Bank, European Economic Union (EEC) and UNDP. This programme was geared to
improve the income and well-being of the Swazi farmers by providing infrastructure, fencing grazing areas,
17

--- Page 18 ---
improving livestock management and land consolidation among other things. Soil conservation became promi-
nent in the RDAP with the introduction of terraces to replace grass strips. According to Osunade (1994 (b)),
only 20% of the planned conservation measures were achieved in the RDAP. Of the planned removal of 39 400
ha of grass strips only 2 034 ha were removed and of the 42 800 ha of terraces, a total of 2 003 ha were
constructed. In most cases, the established terraces are poorly maintained and have contributed to the problem of
soil erosion. This is particularly true in road reserves. On the other hand, although grass strips are also poorly
maintained, they have been successfully integrated to the farming systems of the country. Since 1983, farmers
have continued to lay grass strips in their farms without anybody compelling them (Osunade, 1994 (b)).
The year 1992 saw the establishment of the Swaziland Environment Authority, a body whose mandate is to
oversee all environmental issues in the country. As a result of this initiative, the Swaziland Environment Action
Plan has been produced. Whilst, it is still too early to measure the effectiveness of this initiative, it is important
to note that without effective public participation the initiative is not likely to yield the desired results. Also of
importance in the success of any initiative is to identify and address the key issues in a holistic manner.
Key players in environmental protection have been the Ministries of Agriculture and Co-operatives, and Natural
Resources and Energy. With the transfer of SEA and the Swaziland National Trust Commission (SNTC) in
1997, the Ministry of Tourism and Communication, now called the Ministry of Tourism , Communication and
Environment became involved. SNTC, established in 1972, is the main institution for the development and
administration of national parks and reserves as well as the identification of protection worthy areas.
Environmental Education programmes are also being co-ordinated by SNTC. Key departments or sectors in the
Ministry of Agriculture and Co-operatives regarding environmental protection are the Land Use Planning
Section, Soil Testing Unit, Forestry section and the CRDB. Within the Ministry of Agriculture and Co-
operatives, the Land Use Planning Section is supposed to oversee that land allocation is according to the
capability of the land. The Soil Testing Unit is supposed to ensure appropriate use of chemical fertilisers on
land. The forestry section is responsible for afforestation programmes in the country. Key sectors in the
Ministry of Natural Resources and Energy are the Energy section, Natural Resources Board, Water Resources
Board, Water Apportionment Board and Rural Water Supply Board. The Energy Sector is supposed to ensure
supply and efficient use of energy resources in the country whilst the other sectors have to ensure the
availability of clean water supplies and efficient use of water resources.
4.4: Current and on-going programmes and project
The country has engaged a number of programmes and projects that can significantly contribute to the fight
against desertification. Downing and Zuke (1996) give a detailed review of on-going Programmes and projects.
These programmes and projects are sub-divided into three categories. There are programmes and projects that
are implemented by the Central government department (Table 4.1), those that are implemented by parastatals
and the private sector and programmes and projects implemented by Non-Governmental Organisations. Key
ministries in the central government programmes and projects are the Ministry of Agriculture and Co-operatives
and the Ministry of Natural Resources and Energy. Within the Ministry of Agriculture and Co-operatives, the
key sections are the Land Use Planning, Livestock, Forestry Sections and the Agricultural Promotion and
Extension Programme. There are two sections of the Ministry of Natural Resources and Energy which have
undertaken projects that are relevant to desertification. These are the Energy Section and the Geological Survey
and Mines Department.
Noted in these programmes is the lack of or poor participation of communities in the design and implementation
of the programmes. Of particular concern is the resettlement programme which was meant to address the issue
of land allocations in rural areas. Concern has been raised in a number of areas that whilst people were resettled
to make room for grazing and cultivation, in some areas, grazing lands were not properly fenced or allocated. As
such, there is a shortage of grazing land and the cattle roam around causing destruction not only on the
communal land but also to property (especially trees) and fields. A second area of concern is the apparent
duplication of efforts between ministries or departments and within the same ministry or department. Examples
include the Rural Development Area Programme, Grazing Management Programme, Intensive Livestock
Production Systems Programme, and rural water supply programmes. There is need to consolidate resources in
those programmes that are closely related to avoid duplication.
18

--- Page 19 ---
Table 4.1 On-going government programmes addressing the issue of desertification in the country.
PROGRAMME RELEVANCE IMPLEMENTING AGENCY PROGRESS AND LIMITATIONS
Rational Utilisation of Resources Database to be used in preparation of land-use plans MOAC- Land Use Planning LUPS working on plans to re-organise land-usage and
Section (LUPS) resettlement on SNL but community participation not specified
in document
Swaziland Environment Action Plan Outline of strategies to reduce environmental Swaziland Environment Formally launched in June, 1998 after consultations with
degradation Authority communities and other stakeholders
Rural Development Area programme Relieve grazing pressure through increased marketing Agricultural Promotion Progress is questionable. Minimum achievements in reducing
and cattle fattening schemes. Improve soil conservation Extension Programme overgrazing. Only 20% of target soil conservation measures
through establishment of terraces achieved
Resettlement Programme Division of SNL into arable and grazing areas and Central Rural Development Misunderstanding and poorly defined roles have led to conflicts
establishment of local conservation committees Committee with chiefs thus inefficient local conservation committees
(Imisumphe)
Grazing Land Management Introduction of controlled grazing by a group of farmers MOAC - Livestock section In 1995, only 4 of the original 11 GMDA were functioning. Lack
Demonstration Areas within a small block (100 - 300 ha) of the total grazing or effective animal production and range management extension.
area with hope that non-members will expand the Shortage of land may also be a limiting factor
practice
Fattening Ranches (Holding grounds) Relieve pressure hence reduce overgrazing on MOAC - Livestock section Mainly utilised by a small sector of the population.
communal (SNL) grazing lands empower communities to solve grazing problems.
Intensive Livestock Production Relieve pressure on SNL by identifying appropriate MOAC - Livestock section Construction / rehabilitation of
Systems Programme intensive livestock production systems to increase rural sale yards. Does not quite address the issue of grazing
farmer's income pressure, since the sale of cattle is still at the prerogative of the
farmer.
Livestock Sub-sector Review and Development of livestock policy framework and MOAC On-going
Vegetation Survey provision of data for inclusion in the national land-use
plan
Management of Indigenous Forest Environmental conservation of indigenous forest MOAC - Forestry Section On-going. Need to establish possible effects of the propose fast
and Wattle Plantations products and reduction of deforestation growing trees on buffer zones on water resources and growth of
indigenous tree
Forest Nurseries Introduction, improvement and maintenance of MOAC - Forestry Section On-going
nurseries, especially in firewood-deficit areas
Emphasises on fast growing tree species
Earth dam Rehabilitation and To improve water supply in rural areas and mitigate the MOAC - Land-use Planning On-going
construction effects of drought Section
Komati River Basin DevelopmentDesign and
implementation of irrigation schemes, improve water
supply and provision of hydro-electric power MNRE -
KOBWA On-going Local and Government of RSA
Development of water supply To combat diseases and promote hygienic MNRE On-going
and sanitation in rural areas water consumption and practices MHSW
To uplift standard of living in rural areas and
mitigate the effects of drought
Source: Downing and Zuke (1996)
Allen (1997)
19

--- Page 20 ---
4.4.1 Private Sector Initiative
Within the private sector, the Swaziland Sugar Association and SAPPI Usutu have displayed a keen interest on
initiating programmes with a positive impact on the fight against desertification. SAPPI Usutu initiated the
"Tiphilise Ngelihlatsi project to encourage neighbouring communities to grow commercial tree as an income-
generating project whilst combating soil erosion. This project was formally launched this year, on August 19,
1998. In as much as this programme may contribute to combating desertification, there is need for a thorough
analysis of its environmental impacts, especially with reference to soil processes and possible depletion or pol-
lution of water resources. Downing and Zuke (1996), also note that the Swaziland Sugar Association has played
a key role in drought relief programmes. The water Strategy Planning Committee of the SSA and key
government department have initiated a project on sediment transport for the estimation of erosion in critical
catchments. This project will not only sustain water supply but fish populations within the catchments.
4.4.2 Non-Governmental Organisations
Regarding Non-governmental Organisations, several are NGOs engaged in programmes and projects that
address issues of desertification in the country. Some of these programmes are outlined by Downing and Zuke
(1996) and the report on the workshop on NGO involvement in the NAP process for the implementation of CCD
(Anon). The different NGOs and their programmes are shown in Table 4.2 below. Apart from the listed projects,
Non-governmental organisations also conduct workshops on environmental awareness, soil management, water
management, livestock management, crop production and energy efficient stoves in the different areas of
operation. The key organisations in the conduction of these workshops are the Council of Swaziland Churches,
Baphalali Swaziland Red Cross Society, Lutheran Development Service and Yonge Nawe. Yonge Nawe also
runs workshops on the Convention to Combat Desertification for other NGOs.
The results of a study by Patrick (1988) on Traditional Leaders, rural development and leadership training in
Swaziland indicate that water systems as well as cattle and pasture management are high priority areas in most
communities. The chiefs demonstrated little interest on resettlement, dam construction, land reclamation and
woodlots. This bias is also illustrated in the on-going government and NGO projects and programmes and there
is need to address the issue. For example, of the fourteen (14) on-going projects by government, 4 deal with
sustainable land allocation and utilisation, 4 deal with cattle and pasture management and 3 are water related
projects. Although some work is being done on the rehabilitation of degraded lands, this has been limited to a
few areas. Extended coverage of projects and operation areas can be facilitated by the Co-ordination Unit of the
NAP. This unit should suggest possible projects that deserve to be executed and a list of critical areas which are
seriously affected by desertification. With the exception of the Swaziland Farmer's Development Service,
community participation is not clearly stated in most NGO projects. The National Action Programme
emphasises on this important aspect of project development and implementation. NGOs have the responsibility
to assist communities in the implementation of other projects rather than concentrating on pre-funded or aid-
driven projects.
4.4.3 Research
The university of Swaziland and other organisations have conducted a number of studies on gully erosion in the
country. This information is extremely valuable in terms of determining the most affected areas with regard to
desertification. However, not much has been done on the rate of sedimentation in our river systems and the
destruction of wetlands by sedimentation and trampling. The NAP also encourages further research activities on
these topics. Other topics of research include an analysis of resilient plant species and plants that may be used to
rehabilitate degraded land and wetlands.
20

--- Page 21 ---
Table 4.2 On-going projects under the auspices of NGOs
PROJECT IMPLEMENTING AGENCY RELEVANCE TO CCD AND NAP AREAS OF
OPERATION
Community woodlots Council of Swaziland Churches improve fuelwood supply and reduce Ndzevane
deforestation Lubulini
Homestead and Community Council of Swaziland Churches Improve nutrition in rural areas and Ndzevane
Gardens and Orchards conservation of land. Alternative Ncandvweni
sources of income Mahlabaneni
Sinyamantulwa
Caritas Swaziland KanDzangu
KaLanga
Emphilweni
Elukhetseni
KaShoba
Baphalali Swaziland Red Cross Society Emvundleni
KaHhohho
Sigcineni
KaWelcome
Mantambe
World Vision Lubhuku
Gilgal
Emanti Esive Ngonini
Mahlabaneni
Improvement of grazing Caritas Swaziland reduce soil erosion KanDzangu
lands KaLanga
Emphilweni
Elukhetseni
KaShoba
Protection of grazing lands Baphalali Swaziland Red Cross Society reduce overgrazing and soil erosion Ndlalambi
Mantambe
SFDF Sigwe hills
Rotational grazing World Vision reduce soil erosion and improve Gilgal
21

--- Page 22 ---
pastures
Feedlots Lutheran Development Services Reduce grazing pressure and Mbutfu*
encourage sale of livestock
SFDF Mbutfu*
Lulakeni
Matsanjeni
Donga / Land Reclamation Baphalali Swaziland Red Cross Society Combat soil erosion and rehabilitate Mantambe
the land
World Vision Malindza
Yonge Nawe Zikhotheni
Kukhanyeni
Mahlanya
Lwandle
Drying and Processing of Caritas Swaziland Food security, Disaster relief and Mpholonjeni
food products alternative source of income
Grain Storage Baphalali Swaziland Red Cross Society Food security KaWelcome
Mantambe
Sigcineni
Rain water Harvesting Baphalali Swaziland Red Cross Society Improve clean water supply and KaWelcome
mitigate the effects of drought Mantambe
Sigcineni
Lutheran Development Service Zandondo
Zindwendweni
Mbutfu*
Nsubane
Nsalitje*
Yonge Nawe EVusweni
Domestic Water supply/
Spring protection
Emanti Esive Zindwendweni
Nsubane
Mkhaya
KaNzameya
Terracing Lutheran Development Services Zandondo
22

--- Page 23 ---
Zindwendweni
Mbutfu*
Nsubane
Nsalitje*
Introduction of ostriches Swaziland Farmer Development Foundation Control grass growth and bush Mgamudze
encroachment
Sunflower oil extraction Emanti Esive Alternative sources of income Mbekelweni
Candle making Endlembeni
Poultry keeping Etibondzeni
Retail shop Mahlabaneni
* Collaborative effort between Lutheran Development Services, Swaziland Farmers Development Services , Yonge Nawe, Caritas Swaziland and Umtapo
Source: Anon (1997).
23

--- Page 24 ---
5: EMERGING ISSUES
5.0 Introduction
The establishment of the NSCD facilitated the initial phase of consultation and awareness raising on the
National Action Programme to Combat Desertification. A working document was also compiled for the NAP
(Ndlovu, 1997) and used as a basis for group and plenary discussions during the First National Forum held in
September 1997. The forum identified and prioritised fourteen issues that need to be addressed for the effective
implementation of the NAP. Relationships to other on-going programmes and responsible institutions for the
implementation of the activities were also identified at the National Forum. Below is a detailed description of
the key issues that were recommended and prioritised by the Forum. It will be noted that some of the issues
have been re-arranged to accommodate overlaps and for effective implementation of the NAP. The issues have
been developed into the programme areas expounded in Section 6.
5.1. Proper Institutional Framework for dealing with Desertification
Within the country there are several institutions that deal with land issues. These are the Central Rural
Development Board, Land Development Section, Land-use Planning Section (all under MOAC) and Natural
Resources Board (under MNRE). With the exception of the NRB whose mandate is the management of natural
resources in urban areas, all the institutions are responsible for various land issues in rural areas. The
responsibilities of these institutions includes; the implementation of the resettlement programme, design and
implementation of small irrigation schemes, construction of rural roads, construction of earth dams, land use
planning and land allocation according to capabilities. Considering the integrated nature of the responsibilities
of these institutions the forum felt that they should be merged(except for the Boards) to form a Land
Management Division within (MOAC). It was proposed that the Land management Division should provide
technical expertise to the CRDB and NRB and other agencies on all land use related activities. A co-ordination
unit for all CCD activities also needs to be established within the Land Management Division. To effectively do
this, the Division will need a larger resource base. In rural areas land allocations are the responsibility of local
conservation committees (Imisumphe). These committees must work in consultation with the proposed Land
Management Division and CCD Co-ordination Unit. to avoid irregularities in the allocation of land.
5.2. Chieftaincy and Chiefdom Boundary Disputes
Disputes within and between Chiefs in the country are noted to hamper development and the implementation of
projects and programmes in affected areas. The origins of chieftancy disputes encompass the complex system on
the choice of a successor following the death of an appointed chief to poorly demarcated boundaries between
chiefdoms. Basically, there are two forms of disputes in the country; (a) disputes over the rightful chief and (b)
disputes over boundaries. The debate on who is the rightful chief is a long standing issue. In 1970, King
Sobhuza (II) appointed a commission to address this question. Unfortunately the report of this commission was
never publicised (Patrick, 1988). The forum suggested that chiefdom boundaries must be clearly demarcated and
documented. The need to document the roles and responsibilities of chiefs was also emphasised including
documentation and dissemination of information on the criteria, laws and procedures pertaining to the choice
of successor to the wider public. A register of all chiefs must be kept and up-dated on a continuous basis. This
can be done through consultations with the chiefs and other traditional community authorities countrywide.
Traditional authorities have an important role to play in the enforcement of policies and programmes hence the
success of any process depends on a speedy resolution of the Chieftaincy disputes.
5.3 Awareness and Capacity Building
Noted at the forum is that Swaziland has a paucity of soil and water conservation experts. The few conservation
experts are based at the headquarters of the Ministry of Agriculture and Co-operatives. There are no field
officers that can promote soil conservation in rural areas. Existing extension workers and veterinary officers are
mainly trained on crop production and livestock production and disease control respectively. The forum felt that
trained soil and water conservation specialists should be posted to all four regions of the country. Suitable course
modules on soil and water conservation also need to be developed for extension officers and community training
at the Tinkhundla centres and chiefdoms. Environmental education also needs to be integrated in the formal
education curricula. The training materials have to emphasise the importance of both "scientific" and indigenous
knowledge techniques for combating desertification as outline in Article 19 paragraph 1(d) of the convention.
24

--- Page 25 ---
5.4 Community participation at grass-root level
Communities must be sensitised on the consequences of land degradation and encouraged to participate actively
in land management programmes at grass-root level. This approach is also emphasised in the convention (Article
3 (a) and it is the recipe for a long-term solution to combating desertification. Grassroot (local) communities
have to participate at project identification, planning, implementation, monitoring and evaluation. To achieve
this, the NAP process will accommodate the ideas of local communities, the youth and other relevant
organisations.
5.5 Reclamation and rehabilitation of degraded lands
Land degradation in the country is so severe that crop and livestock productivity levels are affected. It is
estimated that over 55% of communal grazing land on Swazi Nation Land, can hardly produce 100 kg of dry
matter per hectare per year. The severity of land degradation is demonstrated by the widespread gullies, rills and
sheet erosion. With increasing population and demand for more land by competing land uses, the problem of soil
erosion has grown worse (Osunade, 1994). As a result of soil erosion, sediment yield in the drainage systems of
the country have increased resulting in diminishing water supply and fish populations. For example, Pitman
(1977) as quoted by Osunade (1994), notes that sediment yield is about 8 tonnes /ha/yr in the highveld and
middleveld , 10 tonnes/ha/yr in the lowveld the yield and 4 tonnes/ha/year in the Lubombo region. With the use
of agricultural chemicals, soil pollution is also inevitable. To solve these problems, an effective soil and water
conservation unit must be established. This unit must facilitate the return of eroded land into production and
encourage the implementation of soil and water conservation measures in rural areas.
5.6 Sustainable utilisation of land resources
The manner in which land resources are utilised in the country is not sustainable. Land is improperly allocated to
different land uses and in some cases there is no land for grazing purposes. Part of the cause for improper land
allocation, is the country's land tenure system and the rapid population growth rate. In 1994/95, it was
estimated that only 100400 ha is available for settlements and cultivation for a population of 595 000 people on
SNL. This encourages the occupation of marginal lands and further degradation of the land. Concerning
grazing, most rural areas in Swaziland are overstocked and this also contributes to land degradation through
overgrazing. It is important to revise land allocations and explore strategies to control livestock and human
population numbers in the country. Sufficient technical capacity needs to be developed and engaged to assist in
the preparation of land-use capability plans for all catchments. These plans must be drafted in consultation with
all stakeholders, including communities. Women have an important role to play as farm managers hence they
should be actively involved in all the activities and project stages. There is also a strong need for the
management of catchments and monitoring of water conservation structures in the different river systems.
5.7 Research and Technology Development
Although it is known that the middleveld and lowveld are highly degraded due to overgrazing and poor land
management, there is need for intensive research on land degradation issues in the country. The soil erosion
potential of the country needs to be established before prioritisation of soil conservation strategies. Research on
the most effective and appropriate technology to combat desertification is also a must for the success of the
programme. Proposed research activities should include an examination of the underlying causes of
desertification and poverty and how best to address these. The effectiveness of existing soil and water
conservation structures also needs to be evaluated and reviewed.
5.8 Proper Siting And Construction Of Infrastructure
Improper siting and construction of infrastructure contributes to land degradation in Swaziland. There is need to
prepare detailed land use capability maps and to encourage the use of land according to its capabilities.
Operators need to be encouraged to conduct Environmental Impact Assessments and implement comprehensive
monitoring and mitigation plans prior to the siting and construction of infrastructure. The EIAs must not only
concentrate on the physical environment but also the socio-economic environment too. In the selection of
possible resettlement areas where the need arises, the local conservation committees (Imisumphe), Land
Management Division and the CCD Co-ordination Unit should be activity involved.
5.9. Indiscriminate Land Clearing and Veld Fires
25

--- Page 26 ---
There are no regulations and guidelines on the cutting of trees, land clearance and indiscriminate veld burning in
the country. As a result, deforestation and bush fires are on the increase in Swaziland and this situation needs to
be addressed urgently. The environmental impacts of these activities are manifested in severe soil erosion and
water depletion. People cut trees for woodfuel, building purposes and craft. There is need to develop and
encourage the use of alternative energy sources in the country. Accessible alternative building materials need to
be explored to reduce the effects of tree cutting. Furthermore, strategies for commercial wood cutters (e.g. for
craft and building purposes) also need to be examined with local traditional authorities. This may include the
imposition of penalties to be enforced by local traditional authorities where legislation has been flouted.
5.10. Improvement of Livestock Management Practices.
A livestock policy has been adopted by Swaziland. This policy is meant to deal with land issues. Within the
NAP, effective strategies on land management need to be developed in line with the adopted livestock policy.
Critical areas include a review of the number and location of dipping tanks, promotions of small ruminants and
other alternative meat production systems, promotion of cattle sales and the use of alternative feeding schemes
(e.g. feedlots) as well as the review and improvement of government sisa and fattening ranches. Sustanability of
the programmes will depend on information dissemination, capacity building and awareness. As such, periodic
workshops, seminars and information leaflets are a necessity. These should not be conducted for extension
officers only but should involve local community members too.
5.11. Drought Mitigation and Poverty Alleviation
Whilst recognising and appreciating the importance of donor relief food distribution, these can also promote
dependency syndrome amongst the affected communities. It is essential that people are assisted to develop
themselves using available resources and techniques rather than work for food. Alternative means of livelihood
need to be explored and early warning systems strengthened. Acquired information must be dissipated to
communities on a timely basis inorder to avoid disasters or mitigate the effects of drought. Food storage
capacities also need to be improved to ensure food security.
5.12. Land Policy
To address the issue of land degradation vis-à-vis land allocation in the country, a land policy is essential. The
policy must be formulated with the involvement of all the people concerned, starting from the chiefdoms to
industrial and government sectors. This legislation also has to control the irreversible conversion of agricultural
and forest land into non-agricultural and degrading uses. As part of the exercise all existing legislation and
responsible sectors on land issues need to be reviewed and merged where feasible.
5.13. Settlement and Resettlement
The current practice of constructing homesteads with little regard for land use capability and future land
development in the country will eventually results in severe land shortages, especially for crop production.
Coupled with this is the possibility of future costly resettlement and infrastructural development programmes.
To avoid such an occurrence there is need to develop clear criteria and policies for settlements in the country. It
would be ideal to implement the village type of settlements or other suitable settlement models in the country.
This exercise must also involve the revival of the Central Rural Development Board and a close liaison between
the board and the Land Use Planning Section (MOAC). The Senior Planning Officer must sit in the board and
facilitate the transfer of information between the board and the technical wing (Land Use Planning Section).
5.14. Population Policy
Considering that rapid population growth contributes to land degradation through increased pressure on land
resources, a national population policy is essential. Recognising that there are a number of factors that influence
decisions on the size of families, the policy must be drafted in consultation with communities and publicised in
schools, chiefdoms and through media campaigns. Public ideas on the types of measures and incentives to be
put in place have to be accommodated for the success of this policy. It is essential to realise that without an
effective population policy, the NAP process and other related programmes will not achieve the desired outputs.
26

--- Page 27 ---
27

--- Page 28 ---
6: IMPLEMENTATION OF THE NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMME
6.1 Introduction
This section presents the implementation strategy and description of programmes to be undertaken in the
implementation of the NAP. The programmes described here are a reflection of the priorities set out in the
National Forum held In September, 1997 at Mphophoma. This section also sets out the underlying principles
and guidelines for the implementation strategy. This includes a definition of the programme approach. Finally a
detailed description of the programme areas is presented. The presentation on programme areas includes
information on the objectives; outputs; activities; relevance to other programmes; institutional arrangements and
the time frame for implementation. In discussing the relevance of the programme components or areas, linkages
with other programmes especially poverty alleviation, sustainable livelihoods, good governance, NDS and
others are highlighted.
6.2 The Guiding Principles
The principles form the basic guidelines for the implementation strategy. These principles are based on the
following facts and assumptions:
· NAP programmes and projects emphasise popular participation, or “people –led,” to
promote their ownership among communities and enhance their execution and
sustainability.
· NAP provides an enabling environment allowing communities to help themselves achieve
their stated goals.
· It is essential to adopt a programme approach in the NAP to facilitate the full integration of
CCD activities within other national policies for sustainable development. adoption of this
approach also conforms with its increasing usage by governments.
· The implementation of the NAP emphasize building of partnerships between the various
stakeholders and government.
· The implementation of NAP programmes and projects is based on self- initiative and on the
learning –by – doing approach. The experience accumulated is carefully documented and fed
back into subsequent stages of programme/ project implementation.
6.3 The Programme Strategy
The programme approach shall be used in the implementation of the national priorities on combating
desertification. In this approach the NAP goals will be articulated within the several programme areas described
in Section 6.4. According to the UNDP (1997), the programme approach is a process which allows government
to articulate national priorities and realise sustainable human development objectives through a coherent and
participatory national programme framework”. While government takes the lead in human development issues
the programme approach allows donor agencies to support one or more areas or components of a national
programme framework in line with their comparative advantage. The programme approach encourages
integration of all available resources, irrespective of origin, in addressing community / local and national
priorities. In essence, it is a coherent set of interrelated policies, strategies and investments to achieve specific
and time bound national development objectives. It outlines all requirements / resources as well as the
implementation and management arrangements. Several benefits may be derived from the programme strategy.
Most importantly, it offers a medium of amplifying environmental protection issues highlighted in the NDS and
ESRA. In these programmes government has highlighted drought and land degradation as priority problems in
the country. Moreover, the programme strategy acts as a tool for mobilising resources and thus enable the
translation of the convention into action.
6.4. Detailed Description Of Programme Areas
The programme areas described below are derived from the CCD priority areas identified in the preceding
section. Where information is available, all the programme areas will be presented in the following format:
objectives, activities, outputs, relevance to other programmes, institutional framework for implementation, time
frame and cost estimates. It is important to show the linkages and relationships of these programme areas with
programmes developed by other sectors in the country. Such information can facilitate the implementation
28

--- Page 29 ---
process particularly with reference to the sharing of resources and technical information. Knowing the
relationships can minimise the duplication of efforts where duties and responsibilities overlap.
6.4.1 Institutional Arrangements
Objectives: (a) To develop an effective and properly constituted institutional framework for the
implementation of the NAP.
(b) To Establish an Environmental Fund for the implementation of the NAP.
Outputs: (a) A properly constituted institutional structure for the implementation of the NAP to
combat desertification and mitigate the effects of drought.
(b) Regional committees and a gazetted board dealing with desertification issues
established.
(c) National Environment Fund established and implemented.
Activities: (a) Integration of the activities and merging of the Rural Development Office, Land
Development Section and the Land Use Planning Section to form a Land
Management Division.
(b) Creation of a CCD unit to co-ordinate activities for combating desertification within
the Land Management Division.
(c) Strengthening of the Land Administration Board
(d) Establishment of environmental / desertification committees in all regions and
Tinkhundla centres.
(e) Expedite the creation of a National Environment Fund.
(f) Conduct workshops and engage consultants to support and popularise the National
Environment Fund.
Relevance to other Programmes.
This programme area is relevant to government's programme of decentralisation of functions and
responsibilities to Tinkhundla centres. It accords well with objective 3 of the programme on
"Strengthening Capacity for Good Governance" and Article 22, paragraph 2(c) of the Convention to
Combat Desertification.
Institutional Framework For Implementation:
Since the responsible institutions are within the Office of the Deputy Prime Minister and the Ministry
of Agriculture and Co-operatives, implementation of this programme must be co-ordinated by these
two institutions in consultation with the Swaziland Environment Authority.
Time Frame
Short-Term (1 to 2 years)
6.4.2 Chieftaincy and Chiefdom Boundary Disputes
Objectives: (a) To assist in the acquisition of long-term solutions to land disputes within and
between chiefdoms.
(b) To facilitate the implementation of proposed programmes and projects to combat
desertification and mitigate the effects of drought in the affected areas.
Outputs: (a) Documented criteria in the appointment of chiefs.
(b) Codified customary laws and procedures pertaining to the appointment and
demotion of chiefs and strategies on the resolution of chieftaincy disputes.
(c) Delineated and documented chiefdom boundaries.
(d) Adequate information on the roles and responsibilities of chiefs and related
traditional community structures.
Activities: (a) Review and documentation of customary law and procedures pertaining to the
appointment (and demotion) of chiefs and the resolution of chieftaincy disputes.
29

--- Page 30 ---
(b) Delineation and registration of areas affected by chieftaincy disputes.
(c) Mapping and gazetting chiefdom boundaries.
(d) Establish a committee to study and codify duties and responsibilities of chiefs.
(e) Formulate and enact legislation framework guiding appointment and removal of
acting chiefs (time perspective).
(f) Mount community seminars at chiefdom level to explain roles and responsibilities of
chiefs.
Relevance to Other Programmes:
This programme will benefit from the proposed committee/commission to draw chiefdom boundaries as well as
the on-going codification of traditional and customary law.
Institutional Framework For Implementation:
The commission on codification of traditional and customary law co-ordinated by the Ministry of Justice has a
major role to play in this programme. The surveyor general's office which is responsible for all mapping
activities in the country will also contribute in mapping the chiefdoms and their boundaries in the country.
Time-frame:
medium-term
6.4.3 Promotion of Awareness And Capacity Building
Objectives:
(a) To stimulate awareness among communities on issues of combating desertification.
(b) To increase the local capacity of handling land degradation problems.
(c) To facilitate the co-ordination of activities on combating desertification and
mitigating the effects of drought.
Outputs: (a) Increased awareness of land degradation and desertification issues among community
members.
(b) Land degradation/desertification co-ordination unit created.
Activities: (a) Review of school curricula to include environmental issues.
(b) Prepare and distribute environmental pamphlets and other materials to various
academic institutions and libraries/information centres.
(c) Hold periodic technical workshops for community groups, NGOs and public and
private agencies.
(d) Establish community fora/media for information dissemination and discussion of
desertification issues as well as formulation of strategies.
(e) Create a unit to co-ordinate activities and disseminate information on combating
desertification and mitigating the effects of drought.
(f) Mount training sessions for community groups and individuals on desertification
issues.
(g) Identify an institution and upgrade it to mount and handle courses on desertification.
(h) Co-ordinate research activities on desertification.
(i) Facilitate liaison between land degradation control practitioners and communities.
Relevance to Other Programmes:
This programme is in accordance with Article 19 of the CCD. It also accords well with the activities of the
National Environmental Education Steering Committee. The SNTC is currently implementing the National
Environmental Education Programme(NEEP) which is of immediate relevance to this programme. The
programme will also benefit from projects and programmes mounted by NGOs, such as Yonge Nawe that cover
a broad spectrum of the Swazi society.
Institutional Framework For Implementation:
30

--- Page 31 ---
Implementation of this programme will be co-ordinated by SEA and involve NGOs as well as public and private
agencies. The Ministry of Agriculture and Co-operatives will house and facilitate implementation of this
programme.
Time frame:
Medium to long-term
6.4.4 Promotion of Active Participation of Communities in Land Management Programmes
Objective: To improve participation of communities at grassroots level in land management programmes
Outputs: Communities actively involved in land management programmes.
Activities: (a) Encourage active involvement of communities (including youth and women) in the
formulation and implementation of programmes.
(b) Mount continuous education campaigns for community members and groups for
them to appreciate the desertification/land degradation problems.
(c) Support existing environmental action groups and encourage the formation
of new action groups.
(d) Promote the formation of special area action groups such as river basin or
land management associations.
Relevance to Other Programmes:
This programme is in accordance with CCD principles set out in Article 3 of the convention. This programme is
also relevant to components of the programme on sustainable livelihoods, specifically the "participation and
information for sustainable livelihoods".
Institutional Framework For Implementation:
The SEA in partnership with NGOs, CBO and community traditional structures will be responsible for
implementation of this programme. The MOAC, land management division, will be responsible for co-
ordination at national level.
Time frame:
Short to medium-term
6.4.5 Reclamation and rehabilitation of degraded land to promote sustainable utilisation of land
resources
Objective: To reclaim and rehabilitate degraded lands and promote sustainable utilisation of land
resources.
Outputs: (a) Degraded land reclaimed and used for production purposes.
(b) Land allocation and utilisation driven by its capability and sustainability.
Activities: (a) Apply scientific and indigenous technology to reclaim/rehabilitate degraded land.
(b) Evaluate, improve and/or strengthen existing conservation systems.
(c) Develop and adopt new land management systems where applicable.
(d) Prepare and implement integrated land use programmes.
(e) Complete the national forestry policy and legislation to culminate in the formulation
of a national forestry action plan.
(f) Identify areas that are prone to erosion as a mitigation measure
(g) Maintain a balance between socio-economic integration of environmental consider-
ation in policies, strategies and programmes in compliance with environmental stan-
dards.
Relevance to Other Programmes:
31

--- Page 32 ---
This programme fits well into the various on-going activities by communities and NGOs on the reduction of
gully erosion and filling of gullies.
Institutional Framework For Implementation:
Relevant sections in the MOAC and MNRE will co-ordinate and facilitate activities of NGOs and CBOs.
6.4.6 Formulation of a National Forestry Policy And Exploitation of Forest Products Framework
Objectives:
(a) To formulate and implement a national forestry policy.
(b) To encourage sustainable utilisation of forest products and encourage forest regen-
eration and growth.
(c) Upgrading of the Forestry Section into a division
Outputs: (a) National Forest Policy
(b) Framework for the utilisation of forest products
(c) Framework for afforestation projects
(d) Forestry Section strengthened
Activities: (a) Complete the National forest policy
(b) Formulate procedures for forest clearance and tree cutting.
(c) Establish local committees to manage and regulate the use of forest resources.
(d) encourage growth of indigenous and commercial trees/forests.
(e) Raise public awareness and knowledge on forest management.
(f) Increase number of staff and mount periodic forest inventories.
Relevance to Other Programmes.
Several programmes aimed at encouraging forestry and forest management are proposed in SEAP. For example,
promotion of small scale forest industries, expansion of forest plantations in highveld areas and provision of
extension services to improve indigenous forest management.
Institutional Framework for Implementation
MOAC forestry section in conjunction with Tinkhundla, NGOs and CBOs., PSMP which is already approved by
the Ministry of Labour.
Time Frame
Short-term
6.4.7 Research and Technology
Objectives:
(a) To make available applicable information and technology to combat desertification.
(b) To analyse the current environmental situation in Swaziland.
(c) To provide necessary information to influence policy and decision making on deser-
tification and drought mitigation issues.
Outputs: (a) Production/ publication of information on applicable technology for combating de-
sertification.
(b) Production of information kit on combating desertification.
(c) Availability of information on climatic variations and improved early warning sys
tems.
Activities: (a) Document previous and on-going research activities on land degradation and deser-
tification.
(b) Compile critical research areas on combating desertification.
32

--- Page 33 ---
(c) Review less successful previous programmes to identify shortfall and potentials for
success.
(d) Document scientific and indigenous techniques to combat desertification and miti-
gate the effects of drought.
(e) Identify indigenous plants for the rehabilitation of degraded land and determine their
propagation methods.
(f) Examine and document potential strategies for the restoration of wetlands.
(g) Document land resources and their utilisation.
(h) Encourage and fund research and technology development on desertification related
issues.
(i) Analyse and review institutions and regulations on strategies to combat desertifica-
tion.
(j) Analyse current weather records and review current warning systems.
(k) Mount research on multi-purpose and fast growing tree species.
(l) Review and evaluate the efficiency of existing conservation systems.
Relevance to Other Programmes
This programme accords well with any research oriented programme in any institution in the country.
Institutional Framework For Implementation
All sectors involved in research (i.e. UNISWA, MNRE, MOAC, Private research institutions. The activities may
be co-ordinated by the SEA and the proposed Land management division of the MOAC.
6.4.8 Proper Location of Construction Sites And Physical Infrastructure.
Objectives:
(a) To minimise land degradation caused by improper siting and construction of infra-
structure.
(b) To minimise the effects of material acquisition on land and water resources.
Output: Proper siting and construction of infrastructure.
Activities: (a) Conduct and enforce Environmental Impact Assessment regulation and procedures
before the construction of any infrastructure.
(b) Monitor plant operators/operations to ensure adherence to environmental regulations
and concerns.
Relevance to Other Programmes
This programme is relevant to the Environmental Impact Assessment regulations and procedures which were
gazetted in 1996. Currently, the Swaziland Environment Authority has engaged consultant to review these
regulations to emphasise on the socio-economic aspects of EIAs.
33

--- Page 34 ---
Institutional Framework for Implementation
encies, MNRE and other related government Ministries.
6.4.9 Development of Alternative Energy Sources
Objectives: (a) To develop and adopt alternative energy sources.
(b) To reduce sole reliance on wood and other forest products for energy.
(c) To promote efficient use of energy resources.
Outputs: (a) Availability of alternative energy sources.
(b) Utilisation of other energy resources other than forest products.
Activities: (a) Investigate and promote the use of alternative sources of energy such as biogas, solar
and wind power.
(b) Intensify the rural electrification programme.
(c) Facilitate through the provision of resources the establishment of community and
individual woodlots as sources of energy.
(d) Encourage the use of fuel/ energy efficient stoves and other energy conserving
techniques.
Relevance to Other Programmes
This programme fits well into the rural electrification programme, promotion of small scale forest industries,
use of alternative energy sources and energy conserving stoves in rural households.
Institutional Framework
SEB, UNISWA, MOAC (Home Economics Department and Forestry Section), MNRE and SEA.
Time frame
Short-term
6.4.10 Improvement of Livestock Management Practices
Objectives: (a) To increase farmers'' income from livestock production.
(b) To minimise damage caused by livestock on grazing land.
(c) To establish the carrying capacity of national grazing areas.
(d) To promote zero grazing
Outputs: (a) Better management of rangelands.
(b) Improved livestock quality and marketing thereby increasing the income of farmers.
(c) Sustainable livestock numbers.
Activities: (a) Provide incentives and develop strategies to encourage destocking.
(b) Promote supplementary feeding and the utilisation of alternative feed systems
including crop and industrial residues.
(c) Adopt and implement the Dipping Chemicals Bill.
(d) Conduct workshops, seminars and field demonstrations on the potential and
management of livestock.
(e) Develop and promote marketing and management schemes to encourage quality and
availability of livestock products to consumers.
(f) Encourage the diversification of livestock production and other meat production
systems such as poultry and fisheries.
(g) Improve siting and number of dip tanks and watering points for livestock.
(h) Mount periodic research on the carrying capacities of grazing areas.
(i) Promote the fencing of grazing areas and rotational grazing schemes on communal
areas.
(j) Review the management and utilisation of government sisa and fattening ranches to
reduce stocking rates on communal land.
34

--- Page 35 ---
(k) Encourage and demonstrate the benefits of Zero grazing among rural communities.
Relevance to Other Programmes
This programme is in line with the SEAP programme to improve the management of rangelands and promote
the dissemination of information and communication with livestock owners. It also fits into the objectives of the
sisa and fattening ranches programme and the animal health inspection programme.
Institutional Framework For Implementation
MOAC (Animal Health Inspection Unit, Range management division and the proposed Land Management Unit)
in consultation with SEA, Tinkhundla, NGOs, UNISWA (Faculty of Agriculture).
Time frame
Short-term
6.4.11 Drought Mitigation and Poverty Alleviation Strategies
Objective: To develop and implement strategies for drought mitigation and poverty alleviation.
Outputs: (a) Reduced effects of drought and the improvement of the socio-economic status of the
populace.
(b) Improved water availability for domestic and agricultural purposes.
(c) Food security for all communities.
Activities: (a) Construct earth dams and promote irrigated farming.
(b) Improve and promote rainwater harvesting techniques.
(c) Strengthen early warning systems
(d) Promote alternative sources of livelihood.
(e) Bring idle farms into utilisation, especially for crop production.
(f) Increase food storage capacity
(g) Intensify sustainable plant production systems and appropriate technology transfer to
all farmers.
(h) Encourage the appropriate utilisation of ground water resources.
(i) Co-ordinate and facilitate the provision of clean water supply to all communities.
(j) Encourage income generating projects
Relevance to other programmes
This programme is relevant to the broader NDS and ESRA programmes where poverty alleviation is identified
as a priority area. It is also related to the UNDP support programme on the promotion of sustainable livelihoods.
Institutional framework for implementation
MNRE (Rural and other Water departments), SWSC, MOAC, DPM office (Disaster Relief Task force).
Time frame
Short term
35

--- Page 36 ---
6.4.12 Land Use Policy
Objective: To complete and implement the draft land use policy.
36

--- Page 37 ---
Outputs: (a) A comprehensive land use policy that ensures proper allocation of land resources and
minimise land degradation.
(b) A simplified land policy leaflet for awareness raising among the populace.
Activities: (a) Set-up a Task force to complete the draft land use policy with the assistance of con-
sultancies.
(b) Provide land access opportunities and legal security of tenure to all citizens.
(c) Review existing legislation, formulate new legislation where needed and enforce all
land legislation.
(d) Conduct a national stakeholder workshop to popularise the land use policy and edu-
cate all stakeholders.
(e) Prepare and distribute information leaflets on the land use policy.
Relevance to other programmes.
This programme is relevant to the SEAP, NDS and resettlement programmes.
Institutional framework for implementation
SEA, MNRE and MOAC.
Time frame
Short-term.
6.4.13 Settlement and Resettlement Policy
Objective: To develop and implement a settlement and resettlement policy to guide the devel-
opment of settlements in rural and urban areas.
Outputs: (a) A settlement and resettlement policy that ensures proper siting of homesteads and
settlements to minimise land degradation.
(b) Information leaflets on the policy.
(c) A properly constituted settlement or resettlement Authority in rural and urban aras.
Activities: (a) Appoint a task force and engage consultants to produce a settlement and resettlement
policy.
(b) Strengthen the Land Administration Board for the implementation of the resettlement
policy.
(c) Train local/community structures on land allocation and utilisation.
(d) Prepare and distribute leaflets on the settlement and resettlement policy.
(e) Conduct workshops and mount media campaigns to raise awareness on the policy
and its intentions.
Relevance to other programmes
This programme may benefit from earlier resettlement programmes and the National Physical Development
plan and ESRA.
Institutional framework for implementation
MHUD, MOAC, SEA.
Time frame
Short-term
6.4.14 Population Policy
Objective: To control population growth.
Outputs: (a) Reduction in population growth rate and sustainable utilisation of land resources.
37

--- Page 38 ---
(b) Information leaflets on the population policy and population growth control
measures.
Activities: (a) Implement and Enforce the National Population Policy.
(b) Facilitate the Activities of the national population council.
(c) Promote activities and facilities of the FLAS and other NGOs involved in population
growth control.
(d) Set-up a national maximum family size and provide incentives to those whose fami-
lies are within or below the set maximum.
Relevance to other programmes
Population growth issues are included in the on-going NDS and ESRA programmes. FLAS has a long-term
programme on population growth control in Swaziland.
Institutional Framework for implementation
NPC in MEPD, MHSW, SEA, FLAS and UNICEF.
Time frame
short to long-term.
38

--- Page 39 ---
LIST OF REFERENCES
Allen, I.A. 1991. Ensuring our Future: Swaziland National Report on Environment and Development A
report prepared for the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development. Ministry of
Natural Resources and Energy: Mbabane.
Anon. 1997. Workshop on the Involvement of NGOs in the NAP process for the Implementation of the
Convention to Combat Desertification. A report of the Workshop held at Mphophoma Conference
Centre.
Central Statistics Office. 1986. Swaziland Population Census Report. Ministry of Economic Planning:
Mbabane.
Downing, B.H. and S. Zuke 1996. Review of Drought and Desertification in Swaziland.: A background to the
first National Forum, prepared for the government of Swaziland (MOAC). Hassal & Associates:
Mbabane.
Downing, B.H., M. Simelane and L. Kota. 1998. Draft document of the Swaziland National Action
Programme: Prepared for the government of Swaziland (MOAC).: Mbabane.
Government of Swaziland. 1997. Economic and Social Reform Agenda (ESRA). Prime Minister's office:
Mbabane.
Government of Swaziland. 1997. National Development Strategy (NDS). Ministry of Economic Planning:
Mbabane.
Government of Swaziland. 1997. Swaziland National Environment Plan (SEAP). Ministry of Tourism,
Environment and Communication: Mbabane.
Lasschuit, P.E. 1994. Rural household energy strategies in Swaziland. University of Amsterdam; Amsterdam.
Masuku, B.S. 1997. The first National workshop on the formulation of a National Action Programme on
Desertification. A report of the Workshop held at Mphophoma Conference Centre.
Ndlovu, L.S. 1997 The National Action Programme on Combating Desertification in Swaziland. A report
prepared for the first National Forum on the NAP: Luyengo.
Osunade, Adewole M.A. 1994 (a). Community Environmental Knowledge and Land Resource Surveys in
Swaziland. Singapore Journal of Tropical Geography 15: 157 - 170.
Osunade, Adewole M.A. 1994(b). INDIGENOUS SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION: THE STATE OF GRASS STRIPS
AS AN EROSION CONTROL MEASURE. A report prepared for the Centre for Development Co-operation
Services and the International Institute for Environment and Development.
Patrick, Richard, M. 1988. Traditional Leaders, rural development and leadership training in Swaziland.
Social Science Research unit: UNISWA.
SADC-ELMS. 1997. Combating desertification in Southern Africa: The NAP process. A report from the
SADC-ELMS workshop held in Windhoek: Namibia.
United Nations Development Programme. 1997. How to implement the programme approach. UNDP.
39

--- Page 40 ---
United Nations Development Programme. 1997. UNDP country co-operation Framework and related
matters: First Country co-operation for Swaziland (1997 - 1999). UNDP
United Nations Development Programme. 1998. Draft Programme Support on the Promotions of
sustainable livelihoods. UNDP
40