--- Page 1 ---
UNCCD LESOTHO NAP 2015
LESOTHO NATIONAL
ACTION
PROGRAMME IN NATURAL
RESOURCE MANAGEMENT,
COMBATING DESERTIFICATION AND
MITIGATING THE EFFECTS OF
DROUGHT
UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION TO COMBAT
DESERTIFICATION IN THOSE COUNTRIES
EXPERIENCING SERIOUS DROUGHT AND/OR
DESERTIFICATION, PARTICULARLY IN
AFRICA
MINISTRY OF FORESTRY, RANGE AND SOIL CONSERVATION
THE KINGDOM OF LESOTHO
Ministry of Forestry and Land Reclamation i

--- Page 2 ---
PUBLISHED BY: LESOTHO GOVERNMENT
MINISTRY OF FORESTRY, RANGE AND SOIL
CONSERVATION
P. O. BOX 92, MASERU 100
THE KINGDOM OF LESOTHO
Tel: (+266)22323600 www.forestry.gov.ls
 Lesotho Government, Ministry of Forestry, Range and Soil Conservation
2015
ii

--- Page 3 ---
UNCCD LESOTHO NAP 2015
TABLE OF CONTENTS
TABLE OF CONTENTS ................................................................................................... iii
LIST OF ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS .......................................................... iv
FOREWORD ..................................................................................................................... vi
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ............................................................................................... vii
CHAPTER 1: ELABORATING A NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMME IN
LESOTHO ........................................................................................................................... 1
1.1 An Overview of Desertification in Lesotho .................................................................. 1
1.2 The Lesotho National Action Plan to Implement Agenda 21 ........................................ 3
1.3 The United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD) ......................... 4
1.4 The Role of the Ministry of Forestry and Land Reclamation in the NAP Process ......... 5
1.5 Consultations for the Elaboration of the NAP .............................................................. 6
CHAPTER 2:PROGRAMME OBJECTIVE, APPROACH AND RATIONALE ............ 8
2.1 Programme Objective .................................................................................................. 8
2.2 Programme Approach .................................................................................................. 8
2.3 Programme Rationale .................................................................................................. 8
CHAPTER 3:STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND OPERATIONAL OBJECTIVES OF
THE 10 YEAR UNCCD STRATEGY ................................................................................ 9
CHAPTER 4: OPERATIONAL OBJECTIVES OF THE NAP ..................................... 15
OPERATIONAL OBJECTIVE 1: Advocacy, Awareness raising and Education .......... 15
OPERATIONAL OBJECTIVE 2: Policy Framework .................................................. 16
OPERATIONAL OBJECTIVE 3: Science, Technology and Knowledge ..................... 17
OPERATIONAL OBJECTIVE4: Capacity-Building ................................................... 19
OPERATIONAL OBJECTIVE 5: Financing and Technology Transfer ....................... 20
APPENDIX 1. MONITORING AND EVALUATION FOR ALIGNED NAP ................. 22
APPENDIX 2. INVESTMENT FRAMEWORK FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF
ALIGNED NAP .............................................................................................................. 47
APPENDIX 3: BIOPHYSICAL AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC BASELINE
INFORMATION. ............................................................................................................ 50
APPENDIX 4: List of Stakeholders ................................................................................. 56
Ministry of Forestry and Land Reclamation iii

--- Page 4 ---
LIST OF ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
ASIP Agriculture Sector Investment Programme
CBOs Community Based Organisations
CCD Convention to Combat Desertification
CRIC Committee for Implementation of the Convention
CSOs Civil Society Organisations
DCFL Department of Conservation, Forestry and Land Use Planning
DLDD Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought
DoE Department of Environment
DDSC District Desertification Steering Committee
DOE Department of Environment
EIA Environmental Impact Assessment
EMPR Environmental Management and Poverty Reduction
GEF Global Environment Fund
GIS Geographic Information Systems
GNP Gross National Product
GOL Government of Lesotho
IFAD International Fund for Agricultural Development
LAC Lesotho Agricultural College
LUCT Limkokwing University of Creative Technology
MAFS Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security
MCST Ministry of Communications, Science and Technology
MDP Ministry of Development Planning
MEAs Multilateral Environmental Agreements
MEMWA Ministry of Energy, Meteorology and Water Affairs
MFLR Ministry of Forestry and Land Reclamation
MLoGC Ministry of Local Government and Chieftainship
MOET Ministry of Education and Training
MoF Ministry of Finance
MTEC Ministry of Tourism, Environment and Culture
NAP National Action Programme
NDSC National Desertification Steering Committee
NES National Environment Secretariat
NEYC National Environment Youth Corps
NGOs Non-Governmental Organizations
iv

--- Page 5 ---
UNCCD LESOTHO NAP 2015
N.P.K. Nitrogen, Phosphorus, Potassium
NCSA National Capacity Self-Assessment
NUL National University of Lesotho
PTC Production Through Conservation
RMA Range Management Area
RMD Range Management Division
SLM Sustainable Land Management
STIs Science and Technology Institutions
SWC Soil and Water Conservation
UNCCD United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification
VSECC Vegetative Soil Erosion Control Concept
Ministry of Forestry and Land Reclamation v

--- Page 6 ---
FOREWORD
Lesotho’s terrain is spectacularly rough with very high and steep mountains. When it rains
(often erratically) water flows down these slopes at a very high speed, carrying with it some
loose rabble, shallow rooted forbs and shrubs, often leaving behind very shallow and unstable
soils. High speed of water results in a massive loss of soil through rill and sheet erosion.
Population pressure forces settlement in marginal areas together with poor farming practices
such as over cultivation and overgrazing by domestic animals. Therefore, the land in most
instances is left without adequate ground cover. The resultant long term after-effects are a
massive environmental degradation and a declining resource base. If it continues,
environmental degradation will lead to increasing problems like shortage of food, energy and
water.
The United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD) to which Lesotho is
party was ratified in 1995. The objectives of the UNCCD are to combat desertification and
mitigate the effects of drought. According to Article 9 of the UNCCD, all the concerned
parties are to prepare, align and implement National Actions Programmes (NAPs) utilizing
and building on existing relevant successful plans and programmes. The NAPs are considered
to be the central elements of the 10 year strategy to combat desertification. In accelerating the
implementation of the NAP, Lesotho like all the affected country parties had to align its NAP
to the 10 year strategy of the UNCCD. Lesotho has prepared and implemented several
strategies such as the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), the Lesotho Vision 2020 and
the National Strategic Development Plan (NSDP) that include elements of the UNCCD and
therefore were incorporated into the aligned NAP.
The previous NAP document (1999) took into account the results of the Forum as well as the
recommendations of the 1998 meeting of the National Desertification Steering Committee
(NDSC). The update of the NAP was done in 2005 in response to concerns raised by
Committee for the Review of the Implementation of the Convention (CRIC) at its meeting
that national reports did not capture national priorities.
In preparation for the aligned document to the strategy, several stakeholder workshops were
held at district and national level to assess the progress on the implementation of UNCCD in
light of the 10 year strategy.
The lessons learned from these workshops have formed the basis for the elaboration of the
current NAP.
I would like to thank all those who contributed positively in the development of this process.
Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought (DLDD) should be a phenomenon of the past
in this country as we approach the post-2015 development agenda. The quality of the
environment has to be the concern of the whole society, since prosperity of the country
depends on it.
HONOURABLE KABELO MAFURA (MR)
MINISTER OF FORESTRY, RANGE AND SOIL CONSERVATION
vi

--- Page 7 ---
UNCCD LESOTHO NAP 2015
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Lesotho ratified the United Nation Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD) in 1995.
Article 9 of the UNCCD, calls for concerned parties to prepare, make public and implement
national action programmes, utilizing and building, on existing relevant successful plans and
programmes (NAPs), and sub-regional and regional action programmes, as the central
element of the strategy to combat desertification and mitigate the effects of drought.
Endeavours to accelerate the implementation of NAPs, resulted in the adoption decision
3/COP.8, which calls for concerned parties to aligned their NAPs and all relevant national
actions of Lesotho in accordance with the 10 Year Strategy of the UNCCD. Alignment refers
to the need for APs and other relevant implementation activities to comply with the outcomes
areas under the five operational objectives of The Strategy. This means that all APs need to
be checked against the five operational objectives and then each activity linked with the
operational objective it addresses. This should result in the overview table’s listing all
existing activities relating to the five operational objectives as well as highlighting the
overlaps and gaps (proposed tool and annex IV of ICCD/COP(9)/2/Add.1). If the
requirements are not reflected in the NAP, the Party should formulate relevant corrective
measures.
According to the provisions of Draft Guidelines (ICCD/COP(9)/2/Add.1), paragraph 8,
Lesotho National Action Programme need to be improved to better comply with all five
operational objectives of The Strategy. It requires the revision to ensure that the programme
is transformed into a strategic document, and incorporated into development planning and
relevant sectoral investment plans and policies (Outcome 2.2 and 2.3 of The Strategy). The
newly reviewed NAP aims to ensure that the current documents meet all requirements of an
aligned NAP. The review process included checking whether NAP:
 Has been mainstreamed in all relevant sectoral/development policies
 Has socio-economic baselines and relevant indicators
 Has a monitoring and evaluation mechanism
 Has the proper legal and policy framework
 Has a feasible integrated financial strategy (IFS)
 Is aligned in accordance with the guidelines and national priorities of the country
Ministry of Forestry and Land Reclamation vii

--- Page 9 ---
UNCCD LESOTHO NAP 2015
CHAPTER 1: ELABORATING A NATIONAL ACTION
PROGRAMME IN LESOTHO
1.1 An Overview of Desertification in Lesotho
Lesotho has fragile ecosystems because of its topography, type and pattern of rainfall,
erodibility of soils, land use patterns and habitats such as bogs and sponges. The topography
is mountainous with sharp terrains ranging in elevation from 1,460 metres above sea level
(a.s.l.) in the west to 3,400 metres (a.s.l.) in the northeast. The rainfall pattern is very erratic
and unpredictable. The rainy season starts in early spring, mostly with heavy short-duration
downpours and hailstorms all of which cause a lot of soil movement; it lasts till late autumn.
Winters are mostly dry with no active vegetative growth, and therefore favour conditions for
erosive early spring rains. Soils are derived from the underlying sandstone and basalt parent
materials in the lowlands and mountains, respectively. The sandstone-derived soils are highly
erodible. Land use patterns are communal in the rangelands and semi-private in cultivated
lands. Lesotho has world-renowned special high altitude wetland habitats with rare plant and
animal species. These wetlands are a main source of the Southern Africa region’s waters and
Lesotho’s forage resources for livestock.
In Lesotho, desertification is understood as a bio-physical land degradation phenomenon
which manifests itself as loss of biological productivity resulting from over-exploitation and
mismanagement of the natural resource base, be it water, soil, land, plants or animals and
land degradation resulting from excessive soil loss, depletion of grazing resources, loss of
soil fertility, loss of water holding capacity of soils, loss of storage capacity of ponds,
reservoirs, rivers, pools and inundation of bottom lands with sediments (Chakela and
Seitlheko, 19951). Land degradation in the form of soil erosion is pervasive in Lesotho.
Rainwater induced gully, rill and sheet erosion are the primary agents of soil loss. Soil loss is
seen as sheet and gully erosion in many cultivated fields and as gullies that traverse the
rangelands and cultivated fields all the country.
The primary cause of soil erosion is mismanagement of the land leaving it unprotected and
critically vulnerable to agents of destruction. Over-cultivation and overgrazing by domestic
animals are common in Lesotho. Consequently, the land is in most instances left without the
necessary adequate ground cover. In 1977, about 15,000 ha of land area was classified as
gullies and most of the gullies (about 90%) being active (Flannery, 1977). Although gullies
take land out of use permanently and are easily observed, sheet and rill erosion have the
greatest impact on productivity of the land and contribute immensely to the desertification
process. Many fields and pastures have been taken out of production due to excessive sheet
and rill erosion taking with it the topsoil, which is necessary for the production of crops,
1 Chakela, Q. K. and M. E. Seitlheko. 1995. Desertification in Lesotho. A review of policies,
strategies and programmes to address land degradation. Paper prepared for the Lesotho
National Environment Secretariat.
Ministry of Forestry and Land Reclamation 1

--- Page 10 ---
fodder and grass. Over the last 20 years, Lesotho has lost over 100 thousand hectares of
arable land; a 25% decrease in usable land for production of food and fodder.
Loss of biological diversity, deterioration of rangelands and poor crop and animal
productivity are other signs of land degradation and advancement of desertification in
Lesotho. Productivity of major crops and animals has significantly declined in recent years
due to poor land and rangeland conditions. In the early seventies, production of both animals
and plants was relatively higher than it is now.
In the 1970s, a Lesotho sheep produced, on average, 5 kg of wool; maize yields were 2
tons/ha whilst wheat yields were 1.2 tons/ha. However, in recent years, these yields have
declined significantly to levels where they are now 2.74 kg of wool per sheep in 2010/11 and
0.82 tons/ha,1.27 tons/ha of maize and wheat yields, respectively in 2012/132. A decline of
46.3 and 24.0% were recorded between 2009/10 and 2010/11 for wool and mohair
respectively. Such a general decline in productivity of the land has worsened the living
standards of Basotho. The World Bank estimated that 27.5% of the population and 21.4% of
households (117,309 out of 548,032) are at risk of multi-dimensional poverty3.
Furthermore, rangelands have seriously deteriorated. Rangeland carrying capacity have
declined to levels where rearing animals in large enough numbers in Lesotho is becoming
very difficult. The decline in the quality of rangelands has also affected the special and
fragile ecosystems in the alpine reaches of the country. Many bogs and sponges, which
Lesotho is world renowned for, are threatened by over-utilization and trampling by livestock.
The highlands watersheds regulate 43% of the sub-region’s annual rainfall. The wetlands
within these watersheds contain unique plant communities not found anywhere else in the
world. Many other habitats supporting a variety of endemic species are being destroyed. 62%
of wetlands in, for example, Mokhotlong district (eastern mountains) was found as being in
poor condition in a 1988 study under the joint Lesotho/ South Africa Drakensberg/Maloti
Mountain Catchment Conservation Programme. Overall, the country is becoming a
dilapidated landscape with gullies and bare rock. Compounding the problem is even further is
the recurrent drought that often threatens the very existence of the Basotho people.
Although population density sometimes is cited as the underlying factor for resource
degradation, leading to over-cultivation and overgrazing, such a statement needs scrutiny. In
Lesotho, almost all farming systems are of an extensive type. This holds for the cropping
component dominated by maize cultivation on semi-privatized fields, and for the livestock
component of extensive grazing in open access areas. In rural villages, houses with a home
garden and/or fruit trees are a clear minority. Home compounds, not farming fields, used to
have fences that protect them against grazing animals. Trees are seldom seen in conjunction
with agricultural fields. In the Lesotho context, over-cultivation and overgrazing should
hence be understood as resource mining, which has reached and even surpassed its ecological
limits.
2 Bureau of Statistics, 2012-2013 Report
3 World Bank, Poverty Assessment, 2010 page 24
2

--- Page 11 ---
UNCCD LESOTHO NAP 2015
In spite of enormous efforts for several decades of the Government of Lesotho, with
international support, there has not yet been a significant change for the better in the land use
by the rural populations. However, currently there are instruments in place that should enable
implementation of natural resources conservation and protection of the environment more
effectively:
(i) The Environment Act 2001 was passed by Parliament, and was being amended
tenable the National Environment Secretariat to administer it, instead of the
originally intended Lesotho Environment Authority, since there are financial
constraints to create such an independent and autonomous body;
(ii) The national Vision 2020 has been prepared through a thorough consultative process
involving grassroots communities;
(iii) Poverty Reduction Strategy was developed concurrently with the Vision 2020 and
both are now being implemented;
(iv) Synergies should be built between the National Strategy on Lesotho’s Biological
Diversity: Conservation and Sustainable Use and the National Programme of
Action on Climate Change;
(v) The first democratic local authorities since attaining independence in 1966 were
elected in April 2005;
(vi) A new Wetlands Division has been created under the Department of Water Affairs of
the Ministry of Energy, Meteorology and Water Affairs (MEMWA), and by so
doing signaling the urgent steps necessary to protect the diminishing wetlands that
produce Lesotho’s waters - also referred to as “the white gold”.
These issues were brought to the fore in reviewing the NAP.
1.2 The Lesotho National Action Plan to Implement Agenda 21
Because of the seriousness of desertification and drought, the nations of the world agreed on
the text of the Convention at the Rio Earth Summit, and proposed that combating
desertification and mitigating the effects of drought be part of Agenda 21. Lesotho has drawn
its National Action Plan to Implement Agenda 21 and within it are strategies to combat
desertification and mitigate the effects of drought (Agenda 21, Lesotho, 1994).
Lesotho’s strategies to implement Agenda 21 are to:
 Prepare a comprehensive national plan for combating desertification and mitigating
the effects of drought;
 Develop anti-desertification measures to be integrated within the plan;
 Develop early warning systems to enhance preparedness; and
 Promote public awareness of desertification control and management of effects of
drought.
The strategies listed above are in line with the requirements of the UNCCD and the Rio+20
sentiments that say “The time is ripe to agree on a Sustainable Development Goal at Rio+20
on Zero Net Land Degradation to secure the continuing availability of productive land for
present and future generations”.
The goal is to achieve sustainable land use for all (in agriculture, forestry, energy,
urbanization) and three targets are stipulated namely:
 Zero net land degradation by 2030
 Zero net forest degradation by 2030
 Drought policies and drought preparedness implemented in all drought-prone
regions/countries by 2020.
Ministry of Forestry and Land Reclamation 3

--- Page 12 ---
1.3 The United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD)
The UNCCD to which Lesotho is Party was ratified by Lesotho in September 1995.The
objectives of the UNCCD (Article 2) are to combat desertification and mitigate the effects of
drought.
The UNCCD describes desertification as land degradation in arid, semi-arid and dry sub-
humid areas resulting from various factors, including climatic variations and human activities
(Article 1 (a)). In Article 1(b) of the Convention, Combating Desertification is meant to
include activities, which are part of integrated development in areas affected by DLDD for
sustainable development and are aimed at preventing and/or reducing land degradation,
rehabilitating partly degraded lands and reclaiming areas affected by DLDD.
The Convention also embraces the efforts that are meant to reduce the negative impacts of
drought. The Convention thus describes drought as a naturally occurring phenomenon
existing when precipitation is significantly low and causes the hydrological imbalances which
ultimately affect the land resource productive systems (Article 1 (c)). Mitigating the effects
of drought means activities related to the prediction of drought and intended to reduce the
vulnerability of society and natural systems to drought as it relates to combating
desertification (Article 1 (d)).
The purpose of the process of preparing and implementing national action is to harmonize the
country’s efforts in fighting environmental degradation (particularly natural resources
deterioration) and to further strengthen the efforts of the UNCCD and realign them with those
of national environmental programme, particularly the national strategies to combat
desertification.
Lesotho has prepared several strategies that include elements of UNCCD. The most relevant
ones are: the Millennium Development Goals (MDG), the Lesotho Vision 2020 and the
National Strategic Development Plan (NSDP) 2012/13-2016/17 and the strategic
elements/objectives are formulated as part of Ministerial and Departmental policies (National
Forestry Policy, Soil and Water Conservation Policy and Range Resources Management
Policy). In addition to these, the following policies, Acts, bye-laws and regulations are
relevant to the UNCCD:
 The Land Act of 2010,
 National Environment Act of 2008,
 The National Environment Policy of 1996,
 Water Resources Management Policy of 1999,
 Gender and Development Policy of 2006,
 Forestry Act of 1998,
 Land Husbandry Act of 1969,
 Lesotho Food Security Policy and Strategic Guidelines of 2008
 The Lesotho Water and Sanitation Policy of 2007
 National Action Plan for Food Security (NAPFS): 10 Year Plan 2007 - 2017
The priority for combating desertification in Lesotho is based on the implementation of
preventive measures for lands that are not yet degraded, or which are slightly degraded.
However, the severely degraded areas are not neglected but measures to reclaim them are to
4

--- Page 13 ---
UNCCD LESOTHO NAP 2015
be undertaken. Since desertification and drought affect the rural communities more severely,
prior attention is given to these groups throughout the country. In combating desertification
and mitigating the effects of drought, participation of local communities, rural organizations,
National Government, Non-Governmental Organizations and international and regional
organizations is essential. Partnerships will be built to enhance effective implementation of
programmes and activities.
1.4 The Role of the Ministry of Forestry and Land Reclamation in the NAP Process
The UNCCD calls for Parties to work closely together in the elaboration and implementation
of NAPs (Article 14). The NAPs are the key operational tools for transforming the provisions
of the Convention into concrete actions to combat desertification and mitigate the effects of
drought at the national level. This then calls for a central body through which coordination
can be brought about.
Previously, this was delegated to NES (now DOE, a department within the Ministry of
Tourism, Environment and Culture,) established in 1994 to oversee and coordinate the
National Action Plan to Implement Agenda 21 in Lesotho. The aim was to facilitate
management of the physical environment through the human environment. Since the natural
forces do not destroy the balance of environmental components as much as the human forces,
NES found it imperative that, efforts to reverse environmental degradation be addressed
through managing the human environment. In general, the DOE is the lead agency in
environmental management in Lesotho and is mandated to promote socio-economically and
environmentally sustainable development by coordinating, advising, and regulating
environmental management in Lesotho
Through a 2007 Cabinet decision, the responsibility for coordination of the preparation and
implementation of the NAP currently lies with the Ministry of Forestry and Land
Reclamation (MFLR)4, through the Department of Soil and Water Conservation, which
becomes the National Focal Point for the programme.
The mandate of MFLR is to provide policy, legal framework and strategic direction in the
areas of Forestry, Range Resources Management, and Soil and Water Conservation. It is
expected to ensure that, in all its endeavors, it creates opportunities for employment of people
living in rural areas. The main objectives of the Ministry at its inception in 2003 were: to
cover Lesotho with trees; to conserve soil and water and; to manage rangelands. However,
MFLR is apparently composed of the following departments: Forestry, Soil and Water
Conservation and Range Resources Management whose functions are inseparable.
Rangelands are usually protected by grass cover to reduce run-off and provide feed for
livestock. The gentle flow of water from rangelands can be diverted safely into storage
facilities (reservoirs, ponds and tanks) for irrigation to improve cover on arable land. Tree
planting is done to provide fuel wood, but trees also clothe the land as well and purify the air.
4 From March 2015, through a Cabinet Decision, with the same mandate MFLR was changed
to Ministry of Forestry, Range and Soil Conservation
Ministry of Forestry and Land Reclamation 5

--- Page 14 ---
Soil and water conservation is a process of providing land cover which benefits the soil and
animal life of each area.
In order to implement the National Action Programme to Combat Desertification and
Mitigate the Effects of Drought, MFLR, through the Department of Soil and Water
Conservation embraces the following concerns:
 Public awareness on DLDD issues must be promoted and communities at all levels be
empowered to participate in all stages of the NAP;
 Communities must be capacitated to better manage their land resources in a
sustainable manner;
 DLDD monitoring and assessment should support the coordination of the NAP and
initiate development of a national environmental information system with a view to
providing action-oriented information to users;
 Early warning systems must be developed and put in place to enhance drought
preparedness;
 Research, development and transfer, acquisition and adaptation of technology should
increase knowledge of desertification and drought processes and also help develop
appropriate technologies for combating desertification and mitigating the effects of
drought.
1.5 Consultations for the Elaboration of the NAP
The process of formulating the NAP for Lesotho began in May 1995 with consultations at the
national and district levels. At the national level, the process was guided by the production of
a paper by Chakela and Seitlheko (1995) detailing the level of desertification in Lesotho and
the past efforts to combat it. A plenary workshop was held to further elaborate the NAP
process and to indicate the way forward towards countrywide consultations. A consultative
mechanism was then devised to guide the district and village level consultations.
The district and community level discussions were held on the land degradation problem, its
causes and remedies and the programmes that could be engaged to combat it and to better
manage the land resource base. At the same time public awareness on desertification issues
was undertaken. The district and village meetings began in May 1997. All in all ten district
workshops and 37 village level meetings were held.
Lessons learned from the district workshops and the village level meetings were many and
varied but the following are noteworthy:
1. Villagers are aware of land degradation in their respective areas but are unable to take
action due to lack of leadership from traditional as well as cosmopolitan leaders;
2. There are few government-community initiatives to enable active participation;
3. Communities are aware of the laws governing land use and protection of woodlots,
grazing areas and bad agricultural practices, e.g. ploughing down the slope;
4. Communities are also aware that law enforcement is lacking in recent times;
5. Communities are aware that poverty in their areas is real and widespread and also that
it inhibits people to participate fully in land degradation control programmes,
especially where financial resources are required;
6. Communities also realize that individual initiatives in controlling land degradation are
more successful than community or government organized initiatives.
The lessons learned from national, district and community level workshops and meetings
were used by the NES to draft a NAP Concept Paper which was subsequently reviewed and
6

--- Page 15 ---
UNCCD LESOTHO NAP 2015
amended during the National Forum on the UNCCD held in Maseru from 17 to 19 March
1998.
The present document has taken into account the results of the Forum as well as the
recommendations of the October 1998 meeting of the National Desertification Steering
Committee. An update of the NAP was produced in July 2005 in response to concerns raised
by CRIC, at its May 2005 Meeting, that national reports (from developing Country Parties)
did not capture national priorities, and that some still covered time-bound sectoral projects.
As part of the preparation of the current document, several stakeholder workshops were held
at district level to assess the progress on implementation of UNCCD in of light of the
UNCCD 10-YEAR STRATEGY. One-day stakeholder workshops were held in each of the
10 districts of Lesotho and clustered into Northern and Southern groups. In addition to these,
two national workshops were held. The lessons learned from these workshops have formed
the basis for the elaboration of the current NAP.
Ministry of Forestry and Land Reclamation 7

--- Page 16 ---
CHAPTER 2:PROGRAMME OBJECTIVE, APPROACH AND
RATIONALE
2.1 Programme Objective
The objectives of the NAP is to structure and guide the implementation of the UNCCD and
define the elements of strengthening environmental capacities, enhance public awareness and
mobilize active participation in order to better manage the natural resources, combat DLDD.
The objective also contains elements of strengthening the policy, legal and institutional
foundations for environmental management.
2.2 Programme Approach
The programme will, working in line with the strategy of the NES and UNCCD to combat
desertification, work to harmonize all programme activities and raise public awareness on
issues of land degradation and desertification. The programme approach will endeavour to
ensure collaboration and coordination among government institutions, NGOs, the donor
community and the public in order to minimize duplication and fragmentation of efforts and
maximize impact. Of considerable importance is the need for accountability and transparency
of institutions, organizations and agencies that are involved with the implementation of the
NAP. Due to sharing experiences and information, such programme approach shall have a
synergic effect, save resources, improve efficiency and enhance the quality and process of
programme implementation.
The first approach to NAP implementation is to develop a set of indicators of progress or lack
thereof in combating desertification and mitigating the effects of drought. A number of
indicators have been included in Annex 1 and are to be developed further to enable
monitoring and assessment of the programme impacts.
2.3 Programme Rationale
The objective of the UNCCD is to combat desertification and mitigate the effects of drought
through effective action at all levels, supported by international coordination and partnership
arrangements, in the framework of an integrated approach, which is consistent with the
Agenda 21, with a view to contributing to the achievement of sustainable development
(Article 2).
The Lesotho NAP components are in support of this objective and seek to reduce poverty
within the nation’s framework of economic growth and the protection of environment and
natural resources. The NAP seeks to support efforts in capacity building to better manage the
natural resources, combat land degradation and desertification and mitigate the effects of
drought.
8

--- Page 17 ---
UNCCD LESOTHO NAP 2015
CHAPTER 3:STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND
OPERATIONAL OBJECTIVES OF THE 10 YEAR
UNCCD STRATEGY
In order to structure overall programme of the NAP, the five Programme Areas that were
formulated in 1998 and reviewed and adopted as part of NAP in 2005 have been subjected to
a series of stakeholder consultations starting November 2013 in an effort to align the 2005
NAP with the 2007 10 Year UNCCD Strategy. The result has been elaboration of 4 Strategic
and 5 Operational Objectives to guide the implementation of NAP. These are considered as
different dimensions of the programme, and each of these have been further structured with
its own sets of objectives and activities. The four Strategic Objectives and 5 operational
objectives provide the basis for strengthening coordination and arriving at partnership to
support various activities to be undertaken for successful implementation for the UNCCD in
Lesotho.
The four Strategic Objectives are:
1. To improve the living conditions of affected populations
 People living in areas affected by DLDD to have an improved and more diversified
livelihood base and to benefit from income generated from SLM.
 Affected populations’ socio-economic and environmental vulnerability to climate
change, climate variability and drought is reduced.
2. To improve the condition of affected ecosystems
 Land productivity and other ecosystem goods and services in affected areas are
enhanced in a sustainable manner contributing to improved livelihoods.
 The vulnerability of affected ecosystems to climate change, climate variability and
drought is reduced
3. To generate global benefits through effective implementation of the UNCCD
 SLM and combating desertification/land degradation contribute to the conservation
and sustainable use of biodiversity and the mitigation of climate change
4. To mobilize resources to support implementation of the Convention through building
effective partnerships between national and international actors
 Increased financial, technical and technological resources are made available to
affected developing country Parties
 Enabling policy environments are improved for UNCCD implementation at all levels
These are then elaborated into the following 5 Operational Objectives each of which is
described in terms of a varying number of outcomes:
1. Advocacy, awareness raising and education (3 outcomes)
 To actively influence relevant international, national and local processes and actors in
adequately addressing desertification/land degradation and drought-related issues
2. Policy framework (5 outcomes)
 To support the creation of enabling environments for promoting solutions to combat
desertification/land degradation and mitigate the effects of drought
3. Science, technology and knowledge (6 outcomes)
 To become a global authority on scientific and technical knowledge pertaining to
desertification/land degradation and mitigation of the effects of drought
4. Capacity-building (2 outcomes)
Ministry of Forestry and Land Reclamation 9

--- Page 18 ---
 To identify and address capacity building needs to prevent and reverse
desertification/land degradation and mitigate the effects of drought.
5. Financing and technology transfer (4 outcomes)
 To mobilize and improve the targeting and coordination of national, bilateral and
multilateral financial and technological resources in order to increase their impact and
effectiveness
The table below provides a comparative view of the NAP 2005 Programmed Areas vis a vis
the 10-Year Strategy Operation Objectives. The Operational Objectives have provided a
more coordinated approach in the implementation of the NAP in that related activities
strategically treated under one broad area.
Table 1 2005 NAP Programme Areas and UNCCD 10-year Strategy’s Operational Objectives
NAP 2005 Programme Areas 10-year Strategy Operational Objectives
1. Equity, Poverty Alleviation, Solidarity 1. Advocacy, awareness raising and
and Participation; education
Objectives: To actively influence relevant
international, national and local
 To carry out labour-intensive and
processes and actors in adequately
environmentally sound farming
addressing desertification/land
systems
degradation and drought-related issues
 To provide employment
Outcomes:
opportunities, in support of
environmental rehabilitation; 1. Desertification/land degradation and
drought issues and the synergies with
 To provide employment
climate change adaptation/mitigation and
opportunities in environmental
biodiversity conservation are effectively
rehabilitation activities of a public
communicated among key constituencies
nature;
at the international, national and local
 To provide additional sources of levels.
income thereby improving the
2. Desertification/land degradation and
living standards of rural poor;
drought issues are addressed in relevant
 To provide solidarity assistance international forums, including those
for activities of resources pertaining to agricultural trade, climate
rehabilitation which are beyond change adaptation, biodiversity
the capacity of the village conservation and sustainable use, rural
population; development, sustainable development
and poverty reduction.
 To provide access to information
3. Civil society organizations (CSOs) and
on Government programmes and
the scientific community in the North and
responsibilities.
the South are increasingly engaged as
stakeholders in the Convention processes
and desertification/land degradation and
drought are addressed in their advocacy,
awareness-raising and education
initiatives
2. Technical Measures to Alleviate the 2: Policy framework
10

--- Page 19 ---
UNCCD LESOTHO NAP 2015
Pressures on the Natural Resources To support the creation of enabling
Base. environments for promoting solutions to
combat desertification/land degradation and
Objectives:
mitigate the effects of drought
 Improve production systems in order to
Outcomes:
achieve greater productivity whist
conserving natural resources and in the 1. Policy, institutional, financial and socio-
framework of integrated approach to economic drivers of desertification/land
rural development; degradation and barriers to sustainable
land management are assessed, and
 Appropriate management of existing
appropriate measures to remove these
natural formations for the conservation
barriers are recommended.
of biodiversity, watershed protection,
sustainable production and agricultural 2. Affected country Parties revise their
development in those areas not yet national action programmes (NAPs) into
affected by desertification; strategic documents supported by
biophysical and socio-economic baseline
 Rehabilitation through, inter alia, soil
information and include them in
and water conservation, of moderately
integrated investment frameworks.
to severely areas affected by DLDD
drylands for utilization and sustainable 3. Affected country Parties integrate their
production; NAPs and sustainable land management
and land degradation issues into
 Increased vegetative cover and
development planning and relevant
improved management of biological
sectoral and investment plans and
resources in regions affected or prone
policies.
to desertification and drought through
4. Developed country Parties mainstream
afforestation or reforestation, agro-
UNCCD objectives and sustainable land
forestry, community forestry and
management interventions into their
vegetation retention schemes;
development cooperation
 Allocation of land to its best use;
programmes/projects in line with their
support to national sectoral and
 Increase and improve livestock farming
investment plans.
and veterinary services.
5. Mutually reinforcing measures among
desertification/land degradation action
programmes and biodiversity and climate
change mitigation and adaptation are
introduced or strengthened so as to
enhance the impact of interventions.
3. Institutions, Organisations and 3: Science, technology and knowledge
Instrumentation
To become a global authority on scientific
Objectives: and technical knowledge pertaining to
desertification/land degradation and
 Capacity of village communities take
mitigation of the effects of drought.
charge of their development and
management of their resources; Outcomes:
 Strategic planning frameworks at all 1. National monitoring and vulnerability
levels (for development, protection and assessment on biophysical and socio-
management of natural resources) that economic trends in affected countries are
Ministry of Forestry and Land Reclamation 11

--- Page 20 ---
recognize individual roles of supported.
government, NGOs, User groups and
2. A baseline based on the most robust data
communities, and integration of these
available on biophysical and socio-
plans into national development plans;
economic trends is developed and
 Partnership between government, at relevant scientific approaches are
both national and local levels, other gradually harmonized.
executing agencies, non-governmental
3. Knowledge on biophysical and socio-
organizations and land users for
economic factors and on their interactions
planning and implementation of
in affected areas is improved to enable
environmental rehabilitation and
better decision-making.
sustainable natural resources
management; 4. Knowledge of the interactions between
climate change adaptation, drought
 Support mechanisms to local
mitigation and restoration of degraded
communities in the efforts in
land in affected areas is improved to
combating desertification and ensuring
develop tools to assist decision-making.
full participation;
5. Effective knowledge-sharing systems,
 Mechanisms for resource mobilization
including traditional knowledge, 5 are in
(cross sectoral, national and
place at the global, regional, sub regional
international).
and national levels to support
policymakers and end users, including
through the identification and sharing of
best practices and success stories.
6. Science and technology networks and
institutions relevant to
desertification/land degradation and
drought are engaged to support UNCCD
implementation.
4. Knowledge support, Learning and 4: Capacity-building
Communication:
To identify and address capacity-building
Objectives needs to prevent and reverse
desertification/land degradation and mitigate
 National environment information co-
the effects of drought.
ordination centres that will act as focal
points for data collection and Outcomes
management and to provide
1. Countries which have carried out the
standardization in information and
national capacity self assessment (NCSA)
back-up services;
implement the resulting action plans to
 Systematic observation networks linked develop the necessary capacity at the
to development of national systems for individual, institutional and systemic
observation of land degradation and levels6 to tackle desertification/land
desertification (caused by both climatic degradation and drought issues at the
fluctuations and human activities), and national and local levels.
identify priority areas for action;
2. Those countries, which have not
 Permanent system for monitoring previously undertaken capacity needs
desertification and land degradation to assessments, engage in relevant
assessments processes to identify
12

--- Page 21 ---
UNCCD LESOTHO NAP 2015
provide up-to-date information; capacity needs for tackling
desertification/land degradation and
 Long term relay process for
drought at the national and local levels.
development, implementation and
monitoring strategies related to
resource management;
 Process monitoring system based on
agreed principle of interaction;
 Integration of local knowledge and
experience, with validation of
indigenous knowledge;
 Understanding by partners of each
other’s roles, needs, objectives and
points of view (by providing training,
public awareness and open dialogue);
 Understanding land tenure and
customary rights for natural resources
utilisation
5. Drought Preparedness and Drought 5: Financing and technology transfer
Relief Schemes
To mobilize and improve the targeting and
Objectives: coordination of national, bilateral and
multilateral financial and technological
 National strategies for drought
resources in order to increase their impact
preparedness in both the short and long
and effectiveness.
term, aimed at
Outcomes
 reducing the vulnerability of
production systems to drought; 1. Affected country Parties develop
integrated investment frameworks for
 Early warning system to enable
leveraging national, bilateral and
implementation of strategies for
multilateral resources with a view to
drought intervention;
increasing the effectiveness and impact of
 Drought relief schemes and means of interventions.
coping with environmental refugees
2. Developed country Parties provide
and integrated them into national
substantial, adequate, timely and
development planning.
predictable financial resources to support
domestic initiatives to reverse and
prevent desertification/land degradation
and mitigate the effects of drought.
3. Parties increase their efforts to mobilize
financial resources from international
financial institutions, facilities and funds,
including the GEF, by promoting the
UNCCD/Sustainable land management
(SLM) agenda within the governing
bodies of these institutions.
4. Innovative sources of finance and
Ministry of Forestry and Land Reclamation 13

--- Page 22 ---
financing mechanisms are identified to
combat desertification/land degradation
and mitigate the effects of drought,
including from the private sector, market-
based mechanisms, trade, foundations
and CSOs, and other financing
mechanisms for climate change
adaptation and mitigation, biodiversity
conservation and sustainable use and for
hunger and poverty reduction
5. Access sto technology by affected
country parties is facilitated through
adeqaute financing, effective economic
and policy incentives and tecnical
support, notably within the framework of
South-South and North-South
cooperation.
The programme areas of 2005 NAP were reviewed and discussed in a series of stakeholder
consultations (meetings, interviews, workshops) and in order to align the Lesotho NAP with
the 10 year UNCCD Strategy. The lessons learned from of these form the basis of the
detailed elaboration provided below.
The district consultations workshops in Lesotho aimed to gather information of the following
issues related to UNCCD 10 year strategy adopted in 2007:
 The familiarity of the participants with the five operational objectives of the UNCCD
10 Year Strategy, and for which objectives, information on what actions could be taken
to address the issues was sought.
 The knowledge/familiarity with policies and other legal structure that enable the
implementation of the UNCCD and their adequacy in enabling the implementation of
the convention.
 The Steps that can be taken to address the shortcomings in address issues of
desertification, land degradation and drought.
The responses were variable and many, but for them to inform the process properly they need
to be ranked to enable prioritization of the adoption. However, they have enabled the
development of the alignment processes.
A summary of the outcomes and proposed activities to achieve the outcome of the
operational objectives, as informed by the district workshops and the technical workshops
held in May are presented in the next chapter. In addition, a Monitoring & and Evaluation
Matrix has been developed to guide and monitor the implementation of the aligned NAP for
Lesotho.
14

--- Page 23 ---
UNCCD LESOTHO NAP 2015
CHAPTER 4: OPERATIONAL OBJECTIVES OF THE NAP
In the second National Workshop, the activities related to each Outcome of the five
Operational Objectives were elaborated. A list of activities was identified for each of the
Outcomes. However, in some cases the activities were not matched to specific outcomes
under Operational objectives. Furthermore, no outputs were elaborated in the workshop.
Therefore, the main issue addressed in this chapter is the content of the operational
objectives, the outcomes identified for each operational objective and the activities proposed
for realizing the output and finally the operational objectives. With this information, a
detailed matrix to guide the M&E of the process has been developed. The following sections
describe each Operational Objectives, Outputs, Activities and Role Players. Then the M&E
matrix provides a tool for guiding implementation of the NAP.
OPERATIONAL OBJECTIVE 1: Advocacy, Awareness raising and Education
To actively influence relevant international, national and local processes and actors
in adequately addressing desertification/land degradation and drought-related issues
Outcome 1.1: Desertification/land degradation and drought issues and the synergies with
climate change adaptation or mitigation and biodiversity conservation are effectively
communicated among key constituencies at the international, national and local level
Proposed Activities
1. Identify and define target groups and their sensitization needs
2. Identify resources i.e. financial estimates, resource persons
3. Produce and disseminate of sensitization packages
4. Sensitize policy makers on UNCCD issues
Outcome 1.2: Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought issues are addressed in
relevant international forums, including those pertaining to agricultural trade, climate
change adaptation, biodiversity conservation and sustainable development and poverty
reduction.
Proposed Activities
1. Establish and strengthen environmental information systems at all levels
2. Strengthen Institutional performance audits
3. Establish monitoring systems that frequently give feed-back to planning levels
information dealing with response and lessons learned which are relevant for
future implementation of environmental rehabilitation activities
4. Improve coordination among all the stakeholders (from grass roots level to the
highest level of Government).
5. Adopt best practices for farmer-to farmer exchange.
6. Hold awareness campaigns for Village Chiefs, Community Councils and District
Councils;
Outcome 1.3: Civil society organizations (CSOs) and the scientific community in the North
and South are increasingly engaged as stakeholders in the Convention processes and
desertification/land degradation and drought are addressed in their advocacy,
awareness-raising and education initiatives
Ministry of Forestry and Land Reclamation 15

--- Page 24 ---
Proposed Activities
1. Government to sensitize CSOs, NGOs and the scientific community to promote
synergies among conventions
2. Adopt policies and establish administrative structures for decentralized decision
making and implementation for sustainable land management
3. Strengthen the organization and capacity of user groups to plan and negotiate
desertification, land degradation and drought issues
4. Create commitment for long term goals on sustainable land management by all
stakeholders
5. Develop structures for sustainable land management at national and local level in
addressing DLDD issues
OPERATIONAL OBJECTIVE 2: Policy Framework
To support the creation of enabling environments for promoting solutions to combat
desertification/land degradation and mitigate the effects of drought
Outcome 2.1: Policy, institutional, financial and socio-economic drivers of
desertification/land degradation and barriers to sustainable land management are
assessed, and appropriate measures to remove these barriers are recommended
Proposed Activities
1. Assess policy, institutional, financial and socio-economic drivers of
desertification/land degradation and barriers to sustainable land management
2. Mainstream UNCCD objectives and sustainable land management interventions
into development planning programs and relevant investment plans and policies
Outcome 2.2: Affected country Parties revise their national action programmers (NAPs) into
strategic documents supported by biophysical and socio-economic baseline information
and include them in integrated investment frameworks
Proposed Activities
1. Revise national/regional strategies, plans and programmers.
2. Mainstream NAP into major national strategies and programmes
3. Take effective economic, social and other appropriate incentive measures to
encourage the conservation of biological diversity and the sustainable use of such
biological resources including the promotion of sustainable production systems,
such as traditional methods of agriculture, agroforestry, forestry, range and
wildlife management, which use, but maintain or increase biodiversity
4. Promote in situ protection and conservation of special ecological areas (e.g. High
altitude wetlands) through legislation and other means for purposes of combating
desertification while ensuring protection of biodiversity
Outcome 2.3: Affected country Parties integrate their NAPs and sustainable land
management and land degradation issues into development planning and relevant sect
oral and investment plans and policies.
Proposed Activities
1. Promote and encourage investment in sustainable land management in dryland
areas.
16

--- Page 25 ---
UNCCD LESOTHO NAP 2015
2. Develop new and strengthen existing strategies, plans and programmes of action
for SLM, taking into account education and training needs.
3. Integrate SLM strategies into relevant sectoral or cross-sectoral plans,
programmes and policies
4. Coordinate all stakeholders in the planning of action programmes
5. Incorporate sustainability principles in planning and design of projects
Outcome 2.45: Developed country Parties mainstream UNCCD objectives and sustainable
land management interventions into their development cooperation
programmes/projects in line with their support to national sectoral and investment
plans.
Outcome 2.5: Mutually reinforcing measures among desertification/land degradation action
programmes and biodiversity and climate change mitigation and adaptation are
introduced or strengthened so as to enhance the impact of interventions.
Proposed Activities
1. Identify mutually reinforcing measures among the Rio conventions
2. Introduce and strengthen the identified measures so as to enhance the impact of
interventions.
OPERATIONAL OBJECTIVE 3: Science, Technology and Knowledge
To become a global authority on scientific and technical knowledge pertaining to
desertification/ land degradation and mitigation of the effects of drought.
Outcome 3.1: National monitoring and vulnerability assessment on biophysical and socio-
economic trends in affected countries are supported.
Proposed Activities
1. Develop indicators to ensure effective screening and transfer of appropriate
technologies in matters related to desertification
2. Support the integrated data collection and research work of programmes related to
desertification and drought problems.
3. Increasing the understanding of the sustainable use, protection and management of
natural resources to advance long-term sustainability.
4. Support national programmes for integrated data collection and research networks
carrying out assessment of land degradation (e.g. mapping and monitoring the
vegetation cover)
5. Strengthen national meteorological and hydrological networks and monitoring
systems to ensure adequate collection of basic information and communication
among national centres.
5 Not Applicable for Lesotho
Ministry of Forestry and Land Reclamation 17

--- Page 26 ---
6. Establish monitoring systems that frequently give feedback information to
planning levels for future implementation of environmental rehabilitation
activities.
Outcome 3.2: A baseline based on the most robust data available on biophysical and socio-
economic trends is developed and relevant scientific approaches are gradually
harmonized
Proposed Activities
1. Conduct clear and sound baseline studies (situation analysis) to enhance
institutional and human capacity for science and technology to address issues
of DLDD.
2. Establish and strengthen environmental information systems at the national
level.
3. Strengthen national and local environmental assessment and ensure
coordination/ networking between environment information and monitoring
systems.
4. Strengthen the capacity of national institutions to analyze environmental data
so that ecological changes can be monitored and environmental information
obtained on a continuing basis.
5. Review and study the means for measuring the ecological, economic, and
social consequences of DLDD assessment practices.
6. Review and study the interactions between the socio-economic impacts of
climate, drought and desertification and use the results to identify priorities
and to ensure concrete actions.
Outcome 3.3: Knowledge on biophysical and socio-economic factors on their interactions in
affected areas is improved to enable better decision-making.
Proposed Activities
1. Integrate scientific knowledge with indigenous knowledge and experiences for
combating desertification.
2. Enhance capacity at the grass-roots level to identify and contribute to action
programmes through trainings and awareness creations.
3. Establish and utilize mechanisms for consultation and involvement of land
users.
Outcome 3.4: Knowledge of interactions between climate change adaptation, drought
mitigation and restoration of degraded land in affected areas is improved to develop
tools to assist decision- making
Proposed Activities
1. Make study at an early stage of planning for environmental rehabilitation of
successful and/or innovative actions and experiences by local resources users
and authorities.
2. Establish and utilize mechanisms for the consultation and involvement of land
users.
3. Build capacities of local communities and private sector in the application of
technologies to address desertification.
4. Conduct research to identify options that efficiently contribute to address
effects of land degradation and desertification.
5. Promote dissemination of research findings and adoption of appropriate
technologies.
18

--- Page 27 ---
UNCCD LESOTHO NAP 2015
Outcome 3.5: Effective knowledge sharing systems, including traditional knowledge, are in
place at the global, regional, sub-regional and national levels to support policy makers
and end users, including through identification and sharing of best practices and
success stories
Proposed Activities
1. Promote farmers exchange programmes.
2. Produce a catalogue of proven technologies.
3. Build technology packages to combat desertification.
4. Enhance institutional and human capacity for science and technology to
address issues of desertification.
5. Integrate traditional knowledge in project and programmes for combating
desertification.
Outcome 3.6: Science and technology networks and institutions relevant to desertification/
land degradation and drought are engaged to support UNCCD implementation
Proposed Activities
1. Review and study the means for measuring the ecological, economic and
social consequences of desertification and land degradation and introduce the
results of these studies into desertification and land degradation assessment
practices.
2. Review and study the interactions between the socio-economic impacts of
climate, drought and desertification and use these results to identify priorities
and to secure concrete action.
3. Formulate a policy that integrates application of science and technology in
combating desertification.
4. Establish national and local anti-desertification networks comprising
authorities in Government and local committees or associations of land-users
with a view to strengthening coordination between all actors (from grass root
level to the highest level of Government.
OPERATIONAL OBJECTIVE4: Capacity-Building
To identify and address capacity building needs to prevent and reverse
desertification/land degradation and mitigate the effects of drought.
Outcome 4.1: Countries, which have carried out NCSA implement the resulting action, plans
to develop the necessary capacity at the individual institutional and systemic levels to
tackle desertification/land degradation and drought issues at the national and local
levels.
Proposed Activities
1. Develop and enhance of policy and legislative environment that support the
implementation of MEAs
2. Integrate MEA objectives into national and local development planning and
implementation
3. Institutional mandates for the MEAs and promotion of synergistic approach in
implementation
4. Promote awareness on the contents and contexts of the MEAs
5. Increase research and monitoring capacity on MEAs
6. Address human resource issues in the implementing and partner institutions
7. Improve of institutional capacity for the implementation of activities related to
MEAs
Ministry of Forestry and Land Reclamation 19

--- Page 28 ---
8. Develop of training material
9. Train target groups
7. Develop training programmes to increase the level of awareness and
participation of people
8. Build capacities of local communities and private sector in the application of
technologies to address desertification.
Outcome 4.26: Those countries, which have not previously undertaken capacity needs
assessments, engage in relevant assessments processes to identify capacity needs for tackling
desertification/land degradation and drought at the national and local levels.
OPERATIONAL OBJECTIVE 5: Financing and Technology Transfer
To mobilize and improve the targeting and coordination of national, bilateral and
multilateral financial and technological resources in order to increase their impact and
effectiveness
Outcome 5.1: Affectedcountry Parties develop integrated investement frameworks for
leveraging national, bilateral and multilateral resources with a view to increasing the
effectiveness and impact of interventions.
Proposed Activities
1. Hold Consultations with stakeholders
2. Draft a policy document
3. Hold a stakeholders’ workshop to review the document
4. Hold training workshops for science and technology personnel
5. Conduct institutional reforms
6. Undertake study tours
7. Carry out job rotations
8. Encourage attachments
9. Identify suitable sites to conduct research trials
10. Liaise with relevant research institutions/organizations in desertification issues
11. Hold meetings/seminars/workshops/conferences/symposiums with
stakeholders
12. Maintain networks established during the meetings, seminars etc
Outcome 5.2: Developed country Parties provide substantial, adequate, timely and
predictable financial resources to support domestic initiatives to reverse and prevent
desertification/land degradation and mitigate the effects of drought
Proposed Activities
1. Identify domestic initiatives that need financial support
6 Not Applicable for Lesotho
20

--- Page 29 ---
UNCCD LESOTHO NAP 2015
2. Liaise with developed countries to facilitate distribution of financial resources
3. Draft plan of action that indicates the domestic activities to be financed
Outcome 5.3: Parties increase thier efforts to mobilize financial resources from international
financial institutions, facilities and funds, inclusing the GEF, by promoting the
UNCCD/Sustainable Land Management (SLM) agenda within the governing bodies of
these institutions.
Proposed Activities
1. Draft project proposal on DLDD/SLM projects
2. Liaise with donor agencies in order to lobby approval and disbursement of
funds
3. Identify mechanisms to be promoted for coordination of programmes
4. Prioritize projects/programmes to be implemented
5. Coordinate effectively, programmes on DLDD
Outcome 5.4: Innovative sources of finance mechanisms are idenfitied to cambat
desertification/land degradation and mitigate the effects of drought, including from the
private sector, market-based mechanisms, trade, foundations and CSOs, and other
financing mechanisms for climate change adaptation and mitigtion, biodiversity
conservation and sustainable use and for hunger and poverty reduction.
Proposed Activities
1. Establish new environmental monitoring systems
2. Strengthen existing environmental systems
3. Liaise with Lesotho Meteorological services (LMS) to strengthen
meteorological and hydrological networks
4. Collaborate with LMS to capture, store, analyze and use information on
meteorology and hydrology
5. Establish a committee
Outcome 5.5: Access to technology by affected country parties is facilitated through
adequate financing, effective economic and policy incentives and tecnical support,
notably within the framework of South-South and North-South cooperation.
Proposed Activities
1. Identify sources of funding within affected country parties of the South
2. Identify economic and policy incentives suitable and accessible to country
parties
3. Mobilize financial resources
4. Liaise with implementing agencies to ease access and management of finances
5. Finance study tours among technocrats, farmers and traditional leaders to
improve access and exchange of technology among country parties
The activities under each outcome strategically result in specific outputs measured by
performance indicators and linked to role players. In order to guide the implementation of
the NAP a Monitoring and Evaluation Framework has been developed and is presented as
Appendix 1 of this documents.
Ministry of Forestry and Land Reclamation 21

--- Page 30 ---
APPENDIX 1. MONITORING AND EVALUATION FOR ALIGNED NAP
OUTPUT ACTIVITY PERFORMANCE TIMELINES ACTORS
INDICATOR
OPERATIONAL OBJECTIVE 1: ADVOCACY, AWARENESS RAISING AND EDUCATION
To actively influence relevant international, national and local processes and actors in adequately addressing desertification/land
degradation and drought-related issues
Outcome 1.1 Desertification/land degradation and drought issues and the synergies with climate change adaptation/mitigation and
biodiversity conservation are effectively communicated among key constituencies at the international, national and local levels.
1.1.1 Target groups identified Identify and define List and number of MFLR, MTEC, NGOs,
influential leaders and target influential leaders and target CSOs, MAFS, MEMWA,
groups and their sensitization groups MLoGC, MDP
needs
1.1.2 Resources identified and Identify and mobilize Number and type of Financial institutions,
mobilized resources i.e. financial resources identified and MFLR, MTEC, NGOs,
estimates, human resource mobilized CSOs, MAFS, MEMWA,
MLoGC, MDP, MoF
1.1.3 Packages developed and Production and Number and type of MFLR, MTEC, NGOs,
disseminated dissemination of packages CSOs, MAFS, MEMWA,
sensitization packages MLoGC, MDP, MoF,
STIs
1.1.4 Meetings held Sensitization of policy Number of sensitization MFLR, MTEC, NGOs,
makers on UNCCD issues meetings held CSOs, MAFS, MEMWA,
MLoGC, MDP, MoF
22

--- Page 31 ---
UNCCD LESOTHO NAP 2015
Outcome 1.2. Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought issues are addressed in relevant international forums, including those pertaining
to agricultural trade, climate change adaptation, biodiversity conservation and sustainable development and poverty reduction.
1.2.1 Environmental information 1. Establish and strengthen Number and type of MFLR, MTEC, NGOs,
systems established environmental information systems CSOs, MAFS, MEMWA,
information systems at established MLoGC, MDP, MoF,
all level STIs
1.2.2 Functional environmental 2. Strengthen Institutional Number of MFLR, NUL, LAC,
institutions performance audits Trained/Qualified personnel LUCT, DOE
engaged
1.2.3 Monitoring systems 3. Establish monitoring Number of monitoring MFLR,DOE,
established systems that frequently systems established MAFS,MEMWA
give feed-back to
planning levels
information dealing with
response and lessons
learned which are
relevant for future
implementation of
environmental
rehabilitation activities
1.2.4 Increased participation in Improve coordination Number of participating MFLR, MTEC, NGOs,
planning, implementation among all the stakeholders institutions CSOs, MAFS, MEMWA,
and monitoring of (from grass roots level to the MLoGC, MDP, MoF,
environmental issues highest level of STIs
Government).
23
MINISTRY OF FORESTRY AND LAND RECLAMATION

--- Page 32 ---
1.2.5 Farmer to farmer study Use successful cases for Number of farmer to farmer MFLR, MLoGC, MAFS,
tours and information farmer-to farmer exchange study tours and information NGOs
sharing platforms sharing platforms
1.2.6 Awareness campaigns Hold awareness campaigns Number of awareness MFLR, MLoGC, MAFS,
for Village Chiefs, campaigns held NGOs, MOET
Community Councils,
District Councils and
Schools
Outcome 1.3. Civil society organizations (CSOs) and the scientific community in the North and South are increasingly engaged as stakeholders
in the Convention processes and desertification/land degradation and drought are addressed in their advocacy, awareness-raising
and education initiatives
1.3.1 Integrated plans Government to sensitize Number of Integrated plans MFLR, MTEC, NGOs,
CSOs, NGOs and the developed CSOs, MAFS, MEMWA,
scientific community to MLoGC, MDP, MoF,
promote synergies among STIs, Development
conventions Partners
1.3.3 Organizations and user Strengthen the organization Number of organizations MFLR, MAFS,
groups capacitated and capacity of user groups and user groups capacitated MEMWA, NGOs
to plan and negotiate
desertification, land
degradation and drought
issues
1.3.4 Organizational Structures Develop structures (e.g. Number and type of MFLR, MAFS,
Developed committees) for sustainable organizational structures MEMWA, NGOs
land management at national developed
and local level in addressing
DLDD issues
24

--- Page 33 ---
UNCCD LESOTHO NAP 2015
1.3.5 Long-term commitment Create commitment for long Number of declarations All Stakeholders
declarations by term goals on sustainable endorsed by stakeholders
stakeholders endorsed land management by all
stakeholders
OPERATIONAL OBJECTIVE 2: POLICY FRAMEWORK
To support the creation of enabling environments for promoting solutions to combat desertification/land degradation and mitigate the
effects of drought
Outcome 2.1.: Policy, institutional, financial and socio-economic drivers of desertification/land degradation and barriers to sustainable land
management are assessed, and appropriate measures to remove these barriers are recommended
2.1.1 Identified and assessed Assess policy, institutional, Consultancy Report MFLR and other line
SLM barriers in place. financial and socio- produced (C-SIF Lesotho ministries and NGOS
economic drivers of DLDD Report)
and barriers to SLM
2.1.2 Policy adoption and Adopt policies and establish Policy document By 2017 MoLGC, MFLR
decentralized structures in administrative structures for
place decentralized decision-
making and implementation
for sustainable land
management.
2.1.3Sustainable land 1. Mainstream UNCCD Report By 2030 MFLR
management up-scaled objectives and sustainable
land management
interventions into
development planning
programs and relevant
25
MINISTRY OF FORESTRY AND LAND RECLAMATION

--- Page 34 ---
investment plans and
policies
2. Implement community- Area (in hectares) under MFLR
based SLM programmes SLM activities
Outcome 2.2: Affected country Parties revise their national action programmes (NAPs) into strategic documents supported by biophysical and
socio-economic baseline information and include them in integrated investment frameworks
2.2.1 Revised strategies, plans, Revise national/regional Number of revised MFLR, MAFS, MoLGC,
programmes and policies in strategies, plans and strategies, plans and MTEC, MEMWA,
place programmes. programmes MoDP, NGOs, CBO and
others
2.2.2 Increased biodiversity Take effective economic, 1. Number of documents on MFLR and other line
social and other appropriate incentive measures ministries
incentive measures to
2. Number of documents on
encourage the conservation
promotion of sustainable
of biological diversity and
production systems
the sustainable use of such
biological resources 3. Number of species
including the promotion of
4. Increased vegetative
sustainable production
cover (grasslands,
systems, such as traditional
croplands, forests,
methods of agriculture,
wetlands)
agroforestry, forestry, range
and wildlife management,
which use, but maintain or
26

--- Page 35 ---
UNCCD LESOTHO NAP 2015
increase biodiversity
2.2.3 Protection and conservation Promote in situ protection Size of protected areas (ha) MFLR
of unique ecological areas and conservation of special
designated ecological areas (e.g. High
altitude wetlands) through
legislation and other means
for purposes of combating
desertification while
ensuring protection of
biodiversity.
Outcome 2.3: Affected country Parties integrate their NAPs and sustainable land management and land degradation issues into development
planning and relevant sectoral and investment plans and policies.
2.3.1 Sustainable Land Promote and encourage Developed plans and polices MFLR, Finance and other
Management investment investment in sustainable relevant line ministries
plans and policies in place land management in dryland
areas.
2.3.2 Biological resources are Develop new and strengthen Available stocks MFLR, Education and
used sustainably existing strategies, plans and other relevant line
programmes of action for ministries
SLM, taking into account
education and training
needs.
2.3.3 SLM strategies integrated Integrate SLM strategies 1. Plans MFLR,DOE and other
into relevant sectoral and into relevant sectoral or relevant line ministries
2. Evidence of inclusion of
cross sectoral plans, cross-sectoral plans,
elements of SLM
programmes, policies and programmes, policies and
approach in legislation
legislative frameworks legislative frameworks
27
MINISTRY OF FORESTRY AND LAND RECLAMATION

--- Page 36 ---
2.3.4 Multi-sectoral plans Coordinate all stakeholders Multi-sectoral plans MFLR and other relevant
developed in the planning of action line ministries
programmes
2.3.5 Effective projects Incorporate sustainability Number of sustainable MFLR, Public Works,
principles in planning and programmes Mines and other relevant
design of projects line ministries
Outcome 2.4: Developed country Parties mainstream UNCCD objectives and sustainable land management interventions into their
development cooperation programmes/projects in line with their support to national sectoral and investment plans.
2.4.1 UNCCD meetings attended Participate in all UNCCD Reports on meetings MFLR
meetings and COPs attended
2.4.2 Capacitated personnel Build capacity, especially Number of people trained MFLR, MOET and other
within government, business relevant line ministries
enterprises and bilateral and
multilateral development
agencies for integrating
biodiversity concerns,
potential benefits and
opportunity costs
calculations into project
design, implementation and
evaluation processes as well
as evaluating the impact on
biological diversity of
proposed development
projects
Outcome 2.5: Mutually reinforcing measures among desertification/land degradation action programmes and biodiversity and climate change
mitigation and adaptation are introduced or strengthened so as to enhance the impact of interventions.
28

--- Page 37 ---
UNCCD LESOTHO NAP 2015
2.5.1 Mutually reinforcing Identify mutually List of measures 2017 MFLR, MAFS, DOE and
measures among Rio reinforcing measures among other relevant line
Conventions identified the Rio conventions ministries
2.5.2 Impact of interventions Introduce and strengthen the Type and number of 2016 MFLR, MAFS, DOE and
enhanced identified measures so as to interventions other relevant line
enhance the impact of ministries
interventions.
OPERATIONAL OBJECTIVE 3: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND KNOWLEDGE
To become a global authority on scientific and technical knowledge pertaining to desertification/ land degradation and mitigation of
the effects of drought.
Outcome 3.1: National monitoring and vulnerability assessment on biophysical and socio-economic trends in affected countries are supported.
3.1.1 .Effective/functional Develop indicators to ensure Number of M & E MFLR, all line Ministries,
monitoring and evaluation effective screening and Frameworks developed Development Partners,
framework in place. transfer of appropriate Civil Societies, NGOs,
technologies in matters CBOs, Higher Learning
related to desertification Institutions, Private
Sector
3.1.2 Data packs/banks available Support the integrated data Number of up-to-date data MFLR, NUL
collection and research work bases
of programmes related to
desertification and drought
problems.
3.1.3 Positive change of mindset Build capacity for Number of adopted Land users, NGOs, Line
observed. Natural resources sustainable use of natural innovative technologies in Ministries
management and resources. combating DLDD issues.
29
MINISTRY OF FORESTRY AND LAND RECLAMATION

--- Page 38 ---
livelihoods improved.
3.1.4 Data packs available. Support national Number of data packs MFLR
programmers for integrated produced
data collection and research
networks carrying out
assessment of land
degradation (e.g. mapping
and monitoring the
vegetation cover)
Liaise with Lesotho
3.1.5 Meteorological and Report MFLR, MEMWA
Meteorological services
hydrological networks
(LMS) to strengthen
strengthened
meteorological and
hydrological networks.
Collaborate with LMS to
3.1.6 Collaboration and use of Report MEMWA
capture, store, analyze and
meteorological and
use information on
hydrological information in
meteorology and hydrology.
place
Establish a committee.
3.1.7 A committee established Document for establishing MEMWA
committee
3.1.5 User friendly data packs Strengthen national Number of packs MEMWA
available. meteorological and
hydrological networks and
monitoring systems to
ensure adequate collection
of basic information and
communication among
national centres.
30

--- Page 39 ---
UNCCD LESOTHO NAP 2015
3.1.6 Data packs available. Establish monitoring Number of packs MEMWA
systems that frequently give
feed-back information to
planning levels for future
implementation of
environmental rehabilitation
activities.
Outcome 3.2: A baseline based on the most robust data available on biophysical and socio-economic trends is developed and relevant
scientific approaches are gradually harmonized.
3.2.1 Environmental data systems Conduct clear and sound Reports MFLR, MTEC
in place. baseline studies (situation
analysis) to enhance
institutional and human
capacity for science and
technology to address issues
of DLDD.
3.2.2 Cost-benefit-analysis study Conduct a study on cost Reports MFLR
conducted benefit analysis for SLM
interventions in order to
sensitize policy makers and
rationalize decision making
and resource allocation by
government.
3.2.3. Environmental data Establish and strengthen Number of environmental MTEC
systems in place. environmental information data systems established
systems at the national and
local level.
31
MINISTRY OF FORESTRY AND LAND RECLAMATION

--- Page 40 ---
3.2.4 Functional coordination Strengthen national and Coordination body legally MTEC
body in place local environmental established
assessment and ensure
coordination/networking
between environment
information and monitoring
systems.
3.2.5 Methodologies and tools Review and study the means Reports MFLR, NUL
for assessment clearly for measuring the
defined ecological, economic, and
social consequences of
desertification and land
degradation.
3.2.6 Reviews and studies Review and study the Reports MFLR, NUL
undertaken interactions between the
socio-economic impacts of
climate, drought and
desertification and use the
results to identify priorities
and to ensure concrete
actions
Outcome 3.3: Knowledge on biophysical and socio-economic factors on their interactions in affected areas is improved to enable better
decision making.
3.3.1 Diverse technologies Integrate scientific Reports and Publications MFLR, NUL
implemented and knowledge with indigenous
maintained at grass-root/ knowledge and experiences
local level. for combating
desertification.
32

--- Page 41 ---
UNCCD LESOTHO NAP 2015
3.3.2 Positive change of mind Enhance capacity at the Reports on indicating MAFS,MFLR, NGOs,
set of local communities grass-roots level to identify adoption of best practices CSOs
observed in addressing land and contribute to action
degradation issues. programmers through
trainings and awareness
creations.
3.3.3 Informed interventions in Establish and utilize Presence of formal and MFLR, NGOs, Land
place mechanisms for the regular consultative fora users, MLoGC
consultation and
involvement of land users.
3.3.4 Capacity development and Build capacity of local  Reports on capacity MLoGC, NGOs, CSOs,
collaboration among communities and private development MAFS, MFLR
private sector and local sector in the application of
 Incidences of joint work
community established. technologies to address
by any two sectors or
desertification/land
more.
degradation.
3.3.5 A catalogue of proven Identify options that Number of catalogues MFLR
technologies available. efficiently contribute to produced
address effects of land
degradation and
desertification.
3.3.6 Appropriate technologies Disseminate research Reports on increase in MAFS, MFLR, MCST,
adopted in combating land findings for adoption of adoption of appropriate MOET
degradation. appropriate technologies. technologies
Outcome 3.4: Knowledge of interactions between climate change adaptation and restoration of degraded land in affected areas is improved to
develop tools to assist decision- making
33
MINISTRY OF FORESTRY AND LAND RECLAMATION

--- Page 42 ---
3.4.1 Improved and informed Conduct study at an early Reports MFLR
planning for stage of planning for
environmental protection environmental rehabilitation
and rehabilitation by local of successful and/or
resource users and innovative actions and
authorities. experiences by local
resource users and
authorities.
3.4.2 Informed interventions in Establish and utilize Reports MFLR, CSOs, Land
place mechanisms for the Users, MLoGC,
consultation and
involvement of land users.
3.4.4 A catalogue of proven Identify options that Catalogues MFLR
technologies available. efficiently contribute to
address effects of land
degradation and
desertification.
3.4.5 Appropriate technologies Disseminate research Research reports distribution MAFS, MFLR, MCST,
adopted in combating land findings for adoption of lists MOET
degradation. appropriate technologies
Outcome 3.5: Effective knowledge sharing systems, including traditional knowledge, are in place at global, regional, sub-regional and
national levels to support policy makers and end users, in identification and sharing of best practices and success stories
3.5.1 Positive change of mind set Promote farmers exchange Number of exchange Land users, MFLR,
of farmers in addressing programmes programmes established NGOs, MAFS
land degradation issues.
3.5.2 A catalogue of proven Produce a catalogue of Catalogues distribution lists MFLR, MCST
34

--- Page 43 ---
UNCCD LESOTHO NAP 2015
technologies available proven technologies.
3.5.3 Appropriate technologies in Build a tool kit to facilitate Toolkits and manuals MFLR, NGOs, MAFS
addressing issues of land imposition of appropriate
degradation in place. measures to combat land
degradation
3.5.4Traditional knowledge 1. Integrate traditional 1. Number of traditional Within 2 years. MFLR, Traditional
integrated into programmes knowledge in project leaders Actively Leaders, Line Ministries
for combating and programmes for participating in and NGOs
desertification combating DLDD/SLM projects
desertification.
2. Availability of
2. Source out traditional comprehensive
knowledge needed to document showing the
address desertification merging of traditional
knowledge with
3. Merge traditional
scientific one
knowledge with
scientific one
4. Apply integrated
knowledge to address
desertification
3.5.5 Up-scaling of successful Upscale the best practices Area covered under SLM MFLR, MAFS, MLGC
SLM experiences country-wide
Outcome 3.6: Science and technology networks and institutions relevant to desertification/ land degradation are engaged to support UNCCD
implementation
3.6.1 Land degradation Review and study the means Reports By 2017 MFLR, NUL
assessment practices for measuring the
ecological, economic and
35
MINISTRY OF FORESTRY AND LAND RECLAMATION

--- Page 44 ---
social consequences of
desertification and land
degradation and introduce
the results of these studies
into desertification and land
degradation assessment
practices.
3.6.2 Identification of priorities Review and study the Reports By 2017 MFLR
for action against land interactions between the
degradation socio-economic impacts of
climate, drought and
desertification and use these
results to identify priorities
and to secure concrete
action
3.6.3 Functional policy Formulate a policy that Policies documents All stakeholders
documents available integrates application of
science and technology in
combating desertification.
3.6.4 National and local networks Establish national and local  Number of Committees NGOs, Land Users, line
established anti-desertification networks and their functions Ministries
comprising authorities in
 Functional desertification  Number of donor
Government and local
committees projects
committees or associations
 More donors for land of land-users with a view to  Reports and workshops
degradation projects and strengthening coordination
 Number of projects
programmes between all actors (from
supported by private
grass root level to the
 Effective information sector
highest level of
36

--- Page 45 ---
UNCCD LESOTHO NAP 2015
exchange. Government.
 More involvement of
private sector with their
resources.
OPERATIONAL OBJECTIVE 4: CAPACITY-BUILDING
To identify and address capacity-building needs to prevent and reverse desertification/land degradation and mitigate the effects of
drought
Outcome 4.1: Countries which have carried out NCSA implement the resulting action plans to develop the necessary capacity at the individual
institutional and systemic levels to tackle desertification/land degradation and drought issues at the national and local levels.
4.1.1 Land tenure issues Study the relevance of local Report By 2020 MFLR
addressed land tenure and customary
rights for environmental
rehabilitation and
sustainable natural
resources management.
4.1.2 Legislative framework Document lessons learned Government gazette for MFLR
developed on basis of and formulate legislation
lessons learned recommendations for
modifications (if needed) in
land tenure and/or
legislation at an early stage
of planning environmental
rehabilitation programmes
and projects.
4.1.1 NCSA action plan 1. Develop and enhance Number of developed and MFLR, MTEC, NGOs,
implemented policy and legislative enhanced policies and CSOs, MAFS, MEMWA,
environment that MLoGC, MDP, MoF,
37
MINISTRY OF FORESTRY AND LAND RECLAMATION

--- Page 46 ---
support the legislation STIs, Development
implementation of Partners
MEAs
2. Integrate MEA Number of MEA objectives All Stakeholders
objectives into national integrated into national and
and local development local plans
planning and
implementation
3. Institutional mandates Rules and regulations DOE, MFLR (All line
for the MEAs and developed ministries), NGOs
promotion of synergistic
approach in
implementation
4. Promote awareness on Number of awareness DOE, MFLR (All line
the contents and campaigns on MEAs ministries), NGOs
contexts of the MEAs indicated in reports
5. Increase research and Number of research and DOE, MFLR (All line
monitoring capacity of monitoring studies ministries), NGOs
MEAs conducted
6. Address human resource Number of qualified MPS,NGOs, Line
issues in the personnel and institutions Ministries
implementing and engaged
partner institutions
7. Improve institutional Number of successful plans MFLR, MDP, MAFS,
capacity for the implemented DOE, NGOs
implementation of
activities related to
38

--- Page 47 ---
UNCCD LESOTHO NAP 2015
MEAs, enunciating the
importance of
empowering financial
cadre, local government
officers, and decision
makers in NAP.
8. Adopt policies and Report indicating MLoGC
establish administrative administrative structures
structures for
decentralized decision
making and
implementation for
sustainable natural
resources management
9. Strengthen the Number and size of user MFLR, MAFS, MLoGC
organization and groups
capacity of user groups
to plan and negotiate
natural resource
management, and create
commitment for long-
term goals on natural
resources management
of all stakeholders
10. Establish district Number of district structures MFLR, MLoGC
structures for natural
resources management.
11. Develop training Number of training MFLR, MOET, NGOs,
39
MINISTRY OF FORESTRY AND LAND RECLAMATION

--- Page 48 ---
material and materials and programmes MAFS, DOE
programmes to increase developed
the level of awareness
and participation of
people
12. Train target  Number of training MFLR, NGOs,
groups(planning, sessions
research, service
 Number and size of
providers, government
target groups
officials at all levels)
13. Explore the potential for Reports MFLR, NGOs, MEMWA,
engagement of MoF, DOE, Development
public/private sector partners, MDP,
partnerships in land
management as it is still
untapped in terms of
investment for SLM
initiatives. One of the
weaknesses of the
private sector is a lack of
awareness of business
opportunities available
in land and water
management.
14. Build capacities of local  Number and size of local MFLR, MCST, NGOs,
communities and private communities MLoGC
sector in the application
 Number of private
of technologies to
sectors entities
address desertification.
40

--- Page 49 ---
UNCCD LESOTHO NAP 2015
OPERATIONAL OBJECTIVE 5: FINANCING AND TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER
To mobilise and improve the targeting and coordination of national, bilateral and multilateral financial and technological resources in
order to increase their impact and effectiveness
Outcome 5.1: Affected country Parties develop integrated investment frameworks for leveraging national, bilateral and multilateral resources
with a view to increasing the effectiveness and impact of interventions
Output Activity Indicator Timeline Actors
5.1.1 Policy that integrates 1. Hold Consultations with Policy document December 2016 DoC
application of science and stakeholders
technology formulated
2. Draft a policy document
3. Hold a stakeholders’
workshop to review the
document
4. Adopt a policy
document
5.1.2 Institutional and human 1. Hold training workshops 1. Competent as well as Yearly Directors and DPS
capacity for science and for science and motivated personnel
technology enhanced technology personnel
2. Quality and timely
2. Conduct institutional services offered by
reforms institutions
5.1.3 Technology exchange and 1. Undertake study tours 1. Number of study tours Annually MFLR Directors and line
transfer among affected undertaken ministries and other
2. Carry out job rotations
country parties is in place institutions.
2. Reports showing the
3. Encourage attachments
type of technology
41
MINISTRY OF FORESTRY AND LAND RECLAMATION

--- Page 50 ---
transferred
3. Audio-visuals and other
materials that show
different technologies
used during attachments
5.1.4 Integrated programme of 3. Identify suitable sites to 1. Number of sites Yearly Research personnel
research on issues related to conduct research trials identified.
DLDD established
4. Liaise with relevant 2. Research Reports
research
3. Research trials done
institutions/organisation
s in desertification issues 4. Data collection
completed
5. Conduct research trials
5. Published research
6. Collect and analyse data
documents.
7. Publish research
findings/results
5.1.5 National and regional anti- 1. Hold 1. Consistent and or Annually MFLR Directors, line
desertification networks meetings/seminars/work reliable exchange of ministries, CSOs and
established shops/conferences/symp information among NGOs
osiums with stakeholders
stakeholders
2. Number of meetings,
2. Maintain networks seminars, etc. held.
established during the
meetings, seminars etc.
Outcome 5.2: Developed country Parties provide substantial, adequate, timely and predictable financial resources to support domestic
initiatives to reverse and prevent desertification/land degradation and mitigate the effects of drought.
42

--- Page 51 ---
UNCCD LESOTHO NAP 2015
5.2.1 Domestic initiatives in need Identify domestic Report MFLR
of financial support initiatives that need
identified financial support.
5.2.2 Liaison with development Liaise with developed Report MFLR, Development
partners countries to facilitate Partners
distribution of financial
resources
5.2.3 Plan of action drafted Draft plan of action that Plan of action MFLR, MoF, MDP
indicates the domestic
activities to be financed.
Outcome 5.3: Parties increase their efforts to mobilize financial resources from international financial institutions, facilities and funds,
including the GEF, by promoting the UNCCD/Sustainable Land Management (SLM) agenda within the governing bodies of these
institutions.
5.3.1 Adequate financial 1. Draft project proposals 1. Amount of pledged and Yearly MFLR, GEF agencies,
resources for the application on DLDD/SLM projects availability funds Development partners
of science and technology
2. Liaise with donor 2. Number of liaisons
programmes in combating
agencies in order to established
desertification mobilized
lobby approval and
disbursement of funds
5.3.2 Strengthened mechanisms 1. Identify mechanisms to 1. Reports indicating the By 2015 MFLR Directors, line
that promote prioritization be promoted for mechanisms for ministries, CSOs and
and coordination of coordination of coordination. NGOs
programmes and projects on programmes
2. List of identified project
desertification established
2. Prioritise areas.
projects/programmes to
3. DLDD programmes
be implemented
43
MINISTRY OF FORESTRY AND LAND RECLAMATION

--- Page 52 ---
3. Coordinate effectively, implemented on time
programmes on DLDD
Outcome 5.4: Innovative sources of finance mechanisms are identified to combat desertification/land degradation and mitigate the effects of
drought, including from the private sector, market-based mechanisms, trade, foundations and CSOs, and other financing
mechanisms for climate change adaptation and mitigation, biodiversity conservation and sustainable use and for hunger and
poverty reduction.
5.4.1 Environmental financing 1. Identify environmental 1. List showing identified By December MFLR Directors, line
mechanisms at the financing mechanisms environmental financing 2015 ministries, CSOs and
national level in place to be strengthened mechanisms. NGOs
2. Establish new 2. List of new innovative
innovative financing mechanisms
environmental
3. Established
financing mechanisms
environmental
on basis of financial
information system
diagnostic study
already done under 4. Reports showing
SLM project functional environmental
financial systems.
3. Strengthen existing
environmental
financing mechanisms
4. Develop a strategy for
mobilisation of
financial resources.
5.4.2 Capacities of local 1. Identify the vulnerable 1. List showing the 2017 MFLR, CSOs and NGOS
communities and private communities affected by vulnerable communities and line Ministries.
sector in mobilizing funds DLDD
2. Joint plan of activities to
for environmental
2. Liaise with relevant be done by MFLR and
programmes/projects
stakeholders in order to
44

--- Page 53 ---
UNCCD LESOTHO NAP 2015
strengthened build resilience of these line ministries.
communities
3. Knowledgeable
3. Implement new communities capable of
technologies that adopting and applying
address desertification new technologies.
4. Encourage adoption of 4. Number of newly
new technologies by adopted technologies
affected communities
5.4.3 Strengthened national and 1. Establish national and 1. Reports depicting Within 2 years MFLR and line ministries
local environmental local environmental number of environmental as well as affected
assessment and monitoring systems for assessment assessment performed. communities
systems for desertification
2. Establish national and 2. Number of monitoring
issues
local monitoring systems strengthened.
systems
5.4.4 Strengthened national and 1. Liaise with Lesotho 1. Number of functional Within 2 years MFLR and line ministries
monitoring systems to Meteorological services meteorological and as well as affected
ensure adequate collection (LMS) to strengthen hydrological networks. communities
of basic information and meteorological and
2. Strengthened monitoring
communication among hydrological networks
systems.
national centres
2. Collaborate with LMS to
3. Committee established
capture, store, analyse
and use information on
meteorology and
hydrology
3. Establish a committee
Outcome 5.5: Access to technology by affected country parties is facilitated through adeqaute financing, effective economic and policy
incentives and tecnical support, notably within the framework of South-South and North-South cooperation.
45
MINISTRY OF FORESTRY AND LAND RECLAMATION

--- Page 54 ---
5.5.1 South -South funding Identify sources of funding Report MDP, MFLR
identified within affected country
parties of the South.
5.5.2 Economic and Policy Identify economic and Report MDP
incentives policy incentives suitable
and accessible to country
parties
5.5.3 Resource mobilisation Mobilize financial Report MDP
resources.
5.5.4 Management of finances Liaise with implementing Report MoF
agencies to ease access and
management of finances.
5.5.5 Study tours and exchange of Finance study tours among Report MFLR
information technocrats, farmers and
traditional leaders to
improve access and
exchange of technology
among country parties
46

--- Page 55 ---
APPENDIX 2. INVESTMENT FRAMEWORK FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF
ALIGNED NAP
OUTCOME BUDGET
OPERATIONAL OBJECTIVE 1: ADVOCACY, AWARENESS RAISING
AND EDUCATION
To actively influence relevant international, national and local processes and actors in
adequately addressing desertification/land degradation and drought-related issues
1.1 Desertification/land degradation and drought issues and the synergies 255,000.00
with climate change adaptation/mitigation and biodiversity
conservation are effectively communicated among key constituencies
at the international, national and local levels
1.2. Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought issues are addressed in 830,000.00
relevant international forums, including those pertaining to
agricultural trade, climate change adaptation, biodiversity
conservation and sustainable development and poverty reduction.
1.3. Civil society organizations (CSOs) and the scientific community in the 1,260,000.00
North and South are increasingly engaged as stakeholders in the
Convention processes and desertification/land degradation and
drought are addressed in their advocacy, awareness-raising and
education initiatives
Subtotal 3,605,000.00
OPERATIONAL OBJECTIVE 2: POLICY FRAMEWORK
To support the creation of enabling environments for promoting solutions to combat
desertification/land degradation and mitigate the effects of drought
2.1.: Policy, institutional, financial and socio-economic drivers of 115,000.00
desertification/land degradation and barriers to sustainable land
management are assessed, and appropriate measures to remove these
barriers are recommended
2.2: Affected country Parties revise their national action programmes 330,000.00
(NAPs) into strategic documents supported by biophysical and socio-
economic baseline information and include them in integrated
investment frameworks
2.3: Affected country Parties integrate their NAPs and sustainable land
management and land degradation issues into development planning
and relevant sectoral and investment plans and policies.
2.4: Developed country parties mainstream UNCCD objectives and
sustainable land management interventions into their development
cooperation programmes/projects in line with their support to national
sectoral and investment plans.
47

--- Page 56 ---
OUTCOME BUDGET
2.5: Mutually reinforcing measures among desertification/land degradation 4,033.00
action programmes and biodiversity and climate change mitigation
and adaptation are introduced or strengthened so as to enhance the
impact of interventions.
SubTotal 449,033.00
OPERATIONAL OBJECTIVE 3: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND
KNOWLEDGE
To become a global authority on scientific and technical knowledge pertaining to
desertification/ land degradation and mitigation of the effects of drought.
3.1: National monitoring and vulnerability assessment on biophysical and
socio-economic trends in affected countries are supported.
3.2: A baseline based on the most robust data available on biophysical and
socio-economic trends is developed and relevant scientific approaches
are gradually harmonized.
3.3: Knowledge on biophysical and socio-economic factors on their
interactions in affected areas is improved to enable better decision
making.
3.4: Knowledge of interactions between climate change adaptation and 110,000.00
restoration of degraded land in affected areas is improved to develop
tools to assist decision- making.
3.5: Effective knowledge sharing systems, including traditional knowledge, 965,000.00
are in place at global, regional, sub-regional and national levels to
support policy makers and end users, in identification and sharing of
best practices and success stories
3.6: Science and technology networks and institutions relevant to 30,000.00
desertification/ land degradation are engaged to support UNCCD
implementation
Subtotal 1,105,000.00
OPERATIONAL OBJECTIVE 4: CAPACITY-BUILDING
To identify and address capacity-building needs to prevent and reverse desertification/land
degradation and mitigate the effects of drought
4.1: Countries which have carried out NCSA implement the resulting
action plans to develop the necessary capacity at the individual
institutional and systemic levels to tackle desertification/land
degradation and drought issues at the national and local levels.
48

--- Page 57 ---
UNCCD LESOTHO NAP 2015
OUTCOME BUDGET
OPERATIONAL OBJECTIVE 5: FINANCING AND TECHNOLOGY
TRANSFER
To mobilize and improve the targeting and coordination of national, bilateral and multilateral
financial and technological resources in order to increase their impact and effectiveness
5.1: Affected country Parties develop integrated investment frameworks
for leveraging national, bilateral and multilateral resources with a
view to increasing the effectiveness and impact of interventions 3,865,000.00
5.2: Developed country Parties provide substantial, adequate, timely and
predictable financial resources to support domestic initiatives to
reverse and prevent desertification/land degradation and mitigate the
effects of drought. 45,000.00
5.3: Parties increase their efforts to mobilize financial resources from
international financial institutions, facilities and funds, including the
GEF, by promoting the UNCCD/Sustainable Land Management
(SLM) agenda within the governing bodies of these institutions. 60,000.00
5.4: Innovative sources of finance mechanisms are identified to combat
desertification/land degradation and mitigate the effects of drought,
including from the private sector, market-based mechanisms, trade,
foundations and CSOs, and other financing mechanisms for climate
change adaptation and mitigation, biodiversity conservation and
sustainable use and for hunger and poverty reduction. 477,000.00
5.5: Access to technology by affected country parties is facilitated through
adequate financing, effective economic and policy incentives and
technical support, notably within the framework of South-South and
North-South cooperation. 500,000.00
Subtotal 4,947,000.00
Grand Total 10,106,033.00
49
MINISTRY OF FORESTRY AND LAND RECLAMATION

--- Page 58 ---
APPENDIX 3: BIOPHYSICAL AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC BASELINE
INFORMATION.
Lesotho is vulnerable to impacts of extreme weather conditions like heavy rains, floods,
drought, heat stress, hail storms, snow, strong winds and early and late frosts (Lesotho NSDP,
2013/13- 2016/17). In Lesotho desertification is a major problem, more especially in the
southern part of the country and the Senqu Valley where the agricultural land, rangelands,
aquatic plants are seriously threatened. The situation manifests itself to loss of biological
productivity resulting from over-exploitation and mismanagement of the natural resource base,
be it water, soil, land, plants or animals. Many special and fragile ecosystems such as bogs,
sponges as well as their associated species have been threatened by over-utilisation and
trampling of livestock (National Environment Secretariat, 2004)7. These environmental
changes have impacted on natural and physical infrastructure base, slowdown of economic
growth and threaten achievements in social development. Therefore, the Government of
Lesotho and Cooperative partners have dedicated enormous efforts in combating DLDD. Table
3 below indicates biophysical and socio-economic baseline data.
Table 2 Biophysical and socio-economic baseline data for Lesotho
INDICATORS MEASURES REMARKS
VEGETATION COVER
a. Arable Land
i. Area planted for all 173,759 ha 2012/13
crops
(BOS Lesotho8)
ii. Fallow land 137,439 ha 2011/12 (BOS Lesotho)
iii. Area under irrigation 1,189 ha 2012/13 (BOS Lesotho)
b. Forest Cover
i. Indigenous 32,356 ha Baseline year – 2014
7United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification, 3rd National Report, Kingdom of
Lesotho, Ministry of Tourism, Environment and Culture, National Environment Secretariat
(NES), September 2004.
8Bureau of Statistics, Statistical Report No. 10: 2014. 2013 Biodiversity, Land Use and Cover.
Kingdom of Lesotho
50

--- Page 59 ---
UNCCD LESOTHO NAP 2015
INDICATORS MEASURES REMARKS
(Department of Forestry)
ii. Exotics 17,122 ha Baseline year – 2014
(Department of Forestry)
c. Rangelands
i. Range Management 327,895 ha 2003/04 – 2012/13 (MFLR,
Associations Range Department).
ii. Village Grazing 9,868 ha
Societies
iii. Wetland Protected Fenced: 11,274 ha; Restored : Range Monitoring Report,
2,247 ha; and RAMSAR Site: 2011-2012. RAMSAR Site
434 ha is at Letšeng - La –Letsie
Wetland
iv. Carrying Capacity 1.5 ha/LU Palmer, 2013 (Review of
ongoing national monitoring
processes and methodologies
for each of the UNCCD
indicators)
i. Brush Control 7127.9 ha 2003/04 – 2012/13 (MFLR,
Range Department) Invasive
ii. Reseeding of 27,537.9 ha
species removed and
rangelands
reseeding of exposed areas
with appropriate grass seed.
SOIL DEGRADATION
a. Wind Erosion Not Significant in Lesotho
b. Water Erosion
i. Soil loss 4.5 million tonnes per year Distributed as follows: 4, 13
and 107 t/km2/yr. for the
Senqu, Makhaleng and
51
MINISTRY OF FORESTRY AND LAND RECLAMATION

--- Page 60 ---
INDICATORS MEASURES REMARKS
Mohokare respectively
(Makara, 20139)
c. Salinization 4,656 km2 Baseline year- 2010
(Environment and Energy
Statistics Report, 2012)
d. Gullied area 4,931.26 ha Berea District) 2013 (MFLR GIS Section,
Study On-going; study
expected to cover the whole
country)
e. Catchment area 405,954 ha (MFLR GIS Section)
rehabilitated Rehabilitation works have
been implemented in 1,020
catchments countrywide
during the 2003/04–2012/13
period.
i. Diversion furrows 209.74 ha: Area of land protected with
419.47km of diversion
furrows
ii. Stonelines 4,197.84 ha Rangeland protected and
rehabilitated by 4,197.84km
of stonelines
iii. Silt traps 555,644.25 m3 (Volume of Amount of soil trapped was
materials used) not measured. The focus was
on the economic
implications of construction
of structures
iv. Reseeding of 926.15 ha
marginal lands
9 Makara, M. 2013. Assessment of Spatial and temporal soil loss in and out of Lesotho using
RUSLE Model and GIS. MSc. Thesis, University of Zimbabwe, Harare.
52

--- Page 61 ---
UNCCD LESOTHO NAP 2015
INDICATORS MEASURES REMARKS
WATER RESOURCES:
a. Surface Water Availability
Surface water sources e.g. 34,286 km2 AQUA STAT-FAO,30th
rivers January, 2015 at 10:59
i. Renewable water 5.23km3 per year AQUA STAT-FAO,30th
resources January, 2015 at 10:59
ii. Harnessed irrigation 47,909 m3 Baseline year – 2014
water (dam & tanks) (Department of Soil & Water
Conservation)
iii. Ground Water TDS for bore hole water Groundwater Consultants
Quality averages 260 mg/l and for Bee Pee (Pty) Ltd, SRK
springs 112 mg/l Consulting (Pty) Ltd, 2002.
Compilation of the
hydrogeological map atlas
for the SADC region:
Situation Analysis Report
Annex D - Lesotho
c. Ground Water 122 springs , 89 boreholes Groundwater Consultants
Availability Bee Pee (Pty) Ltd, SRK
Consulting (Pty) Ltd, 2002.
Compilation of the
hydrogeological map atlas
for the SADC region:
Situation Analysis Report
Annex D - Lesotho
CLIMATE
a. Mean Annual Rainfall 865 mm 2000-2010 (Environment
and Energy Statistics Report,
2012)
b. Annual Temperature Minimum: 8.0 °C 2002-2010 (Environment
and Energy Statistics Report,
Maximum: 22.0 °C
2012)
c. Evaporation Highlands: 1,400mm http://www.lesmet.org.ls/cim
atology/climate-lesotho,
Lowlands: 1,600mm
02/02/2015
53
MINISTRY OF FORESTRY AND LAND RECLAMATION

--- Page 62 ---
INDICATORS MEASURES REMARKS
ECONOMIC
a. GDP growth rate 4.6% National Accounts of
Lesotho 2003-2012
b. GNI per capita at M7614
constant prices
Farm yields
i. Milk Production 21,068,169 litres 2012/13 (Lesotho Livestock
Products 2012/13, BOS
i. Wool Production 3,598,170 kg
Lesotho)
ii. Mohair Production 472,151 kg
iii. Egg Production 1,949,714 eggs
iv. Meat Production 690,869 kg
v. Maize Production 0.82 Mt/ha 2012/13 (Agricultural
Production Survey, Crops,
vi. Sorghum Production 0.89 Mt/ha
BOS Lesotho)
vii. Wheat Production 1.27 Mt/ ha
viii. Beans Production 0.28 Mt/ha
ix. Peas Production 0.71 Mt/ha
SOCIAL
a. Population 1,894, 194 people(De Jure) 2011 Lesotho Demographic
Survey (BOS 2013)
b. Poverty: life 41.84
expectancy at birth
c. Total fertility rate 3.4
d. Vulnerability: 447,760 people LESOTHO: Vulnerability
susceptibility of Assessment Committee
livelihoods to drought Results 2014 (LVAC)
e. Food poverty line M138.9 2011 Lesotho Demographic
Survey (BOS 2013)
f. Poverty line M246.9
g. Infant mortality rate 94 per 1000 per year
54

--- Page 63 ---
UNCCD LESOTHO NAP 2015
INDICATORS MEASURES REMARKS
h. Child mortality rate 43 per 1000 per year
i. Maternal mortality 1143 per 1000 per year
j. Literacy 87.4%
k. Unemployment 25.3%
55
MINISTRY OF FORESTRY AND LAND RECLAMATION

--- Page 64 ---
APPENDIX 4: List of Stakeholders
1. Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security (Director of Livestock, Director of Crops
and Irrigation, Director of Research, Lesotho Agricultural College)
2. Ministry of Water Affairs, Energy and Meteorological Services (Department of Water
affairs)
3. Ministry of Ministry of Water Affairs, Energy and Meteorological Services
(Department of Meteorology)
4. Ministry of Tourism, Environment and Culture (Department of Environment)
5. Ministry of Foreign Affairs & international Relations (Directorate of Economic Affairs
& International Organizations)
6. Lesotho Highland Development Authority (LHDA)
7. Participatory Ecological Land Use Management (PELUM)
8. Rural Self-Help Development Association (RSDA)
9. Serumula Development Association (SDA)
10. Ministry of Finance
11. Ministry of Development Planning (NSDP)
12. Ministry of Local Government and Chieftainship (Department of Land Use Planning
and Chieftainship)
13. National University of Lesotho (Department of Soil Science , Faculty of Agriculture
and Department of Geography and Environmental Science, Faculty of Science and
Technology)
14. World Vision
15. Transformation Resource Centre
16. Geographical Environment Movement
17. Lesotho College of Education
18. Tikoloho ea lehae la rona (Coordinated by UNESCO)
19. FAO
20. UNDP
21. WFP
22. Sustainable Land Management Project
23. CARE Lesotho
56