--- Page 1 ---
REPUBLIC OF NIGER
THE PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE
NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT COUNCIL
FOR A SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT (CNEDD)
NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT PROGRAM FOR A
SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT (PNEDD)
NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAM FOR COMBATING
DESERTIFICATION AND NATURAL RESOURCES
MANAGEMENT (PAN-LCD/GRN)
November 2000

--- Page 2 ---
2
Niger has been supported in the elaboration process of its
National Plan of Action for Combating Desertification and National
Resources Management (PAN/LCD/GRN) by the following partners:
UNDP
UNSO
PGRN
ITALY
IFAD
CCD
CILSS
OSS
IUCN

--- Page 3 ---
3
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ACRONYMS & ABBREVIATIONS
FORE-WORD
Chapter I. GENERAL CONTEXT
1.1 Geographical Situation
1.2 Ecological Context
1.2.1 .Climatic Characteristics
1.2.2 .Natural Resources
1.3 Socio-Economic Context
1.3.1. Population
1.3.2. Agriculture
1.3.3. Livestock
1.3.4. Forestry
1.3.5. Fishing
1.3.6. Industry, Tourism and Mines
1.4. Socio-Political Context
Chapter II. DIAGNOSTIC ASSESSMENT OF COMBATING DESERTIFICATION
AND NATURAL RESOURCES MANAGEMENT
II.1 The Issue of Combating Desertification and the Natural
Resources Management
II.1.1 Issues
II.1.2 Desertification Factors and their consequences in Niger
II.2 Element of policies analysis, strategies plans and program in
LCD/GRN
II.2.1. Multi-sectorial adapted to current requirements
II.2.2. Plans, Program and projects
II.2.3. Analysis of resources mobilization strategy
II.3 Legal, Regulatory and Institutional framework of LCD/GRN
II.3.1. Legal and regulatory framework
II.3.2. Institutional framework
II.4 Drawn Lessons
Chapter III. NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAM FOR COMBATING DESERTIFICATION
AND NATURAL RESOURCES MANAGEMENT (PAN-LCD/GRN)
III.1 Challenges, Objectives and Strategies of the PAN-LCD/GRN
III.1.1 Challenges
III.1.2 Objectives
III.1.3 National Strategy
III.2 Priority areas of the PAN-LCD/GRN
III.2.1 Natural Resources management

--- Page 4 ---
4
III.2.2 Combating hazards and Constraints Related to Natural
resources Management
III.2.3 Support Mechanism to Combating Desertification and
Sustainable management of national resources
III.3 Priority sub-programs of the PAN-LCD/GRN
III.4 Urgent Actions
III.5 Implementation of the PAN-LCD/GRN
III.5.1 Implementation Modes
III.5.2 Implementation of Legal regulatory, institutional and
organizational framework
III.5.3 Human Resources Mobilization
III.5.4 Financial resources mobilization
III.5.5 Monitoring - Evaluation and Impact assessment Mechanism
III.6 Risks
Bibliographical references
Annexes

--- Page 5 ---
5
MAIN ABBREVIATION USED IN THE TEXT
NBA Niger Basin Authority
TCCA Technical and Cultural Cooperation Agency
CIDA Canadian International Development Agency
ACMAD African Center of Meteorological Applications for the
Development
AEP Potable Water Supply
AGRHYMET Hydrology and Agro-Meteorology Training Center
WB World Bank
CCD Convention on Combating Desertification
UNCCC United Nations Convention on Climate Changes
CILSS Inter-State Committee to Combat Desertification in the
Sahel
C/GRN Natural Resources Management Unit
CES/DRS Ground Water Conservation/Land preservation and
Restoration
CFDT French Company for Textile Development
CFJA Young Farmers Training Center
CPR Rural Development Center
CPT Technical Proficiency Center
CNEDD National Environment Council for a sustainable
Development
UNCED United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development
COMINAK Akokan Mining Company
CRESA Regional Center for Specialized Training in Agriculture
DCE Capacity Development in Environment
DDRL Regional and Local Development Directorate
DE Directorate of Environment (Ministry of water resources
and Environment)
EE Environmental Education
EIE Impact assessment on Environment
EMAIR Aïr School of Mining
FED European Development Fund
WEF World Environment Fund
FNE National Environment Fund
GIE Economic Interest Group
GTZ German Agency for Technical Assistance
IEC Information, Education Communication
INRAN National Agricultural Research Institute of Niger
IPDR Practical Institute of Rural Development
PDR-ADM Rural Development Project - Ader Doutchi Maggia
PDRT Tahoua Rural Development Project
PBVT Tarka Low Valley Project
CPR Rural Development Center
CFCA Literacy Staff Training Center

--- Page 6 ---
6
MAG/EL Ministry of Agriculture and Breeding
MHE Ministry of Water Resources and Environment
MME Ministry of Mines and Energy
OCB Grassroots Communities Organization
ONG Non-Governmental Organization
OPVN Niger Food Office
OSS
PAFT Tropical Forestry Action Plan
PAN-LCD/GRN National Action Program for Combating Desertification and
Natural Resources Management
PAR Regional Action Program
PAS Structural Adjustment Program
PASP Agricultural and Breeding Project
PASR Sub-Regional Action Program
PDRM Mayahi Rural Development Project
PIB Gross Domestic Product
PIE State Investment Program
PIK Keita Integrated Project
PNB Gross National Product
FNUAP United Nations Population Fund
FIDA Agricultural Development International Fund
FIT Inter-tropical Front
PGRN Natural Resources Management Program
PFIE Training/Information in Environment Program
PNEDD National Environment Program for a Sustainable
Development
PNLCD National Program for Combating Desertification
PNUD United Nations Development Program
PRSAA Strengthening Agriculture Support Services Program
SIE Environmental Information Service
SIFOM Multi-usage Land Information System
SIGNER Geographical Information System of Niger
SNV Netherlands Development Assistance Association
SONICHAR Niger Coal Company
UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization
UNICEF United Nations Infancy, Child, Education Fund
USAID United States Agency for International Development
SOMAIR Air Mines Company
NB:
The main terms used in the present document namely, desertification, drought
as well as all concepts related to combating desertification and management of
natural resources are defined in the CCD.

--- Page 7 ---
7
FOREWORD
The current document constitutes the National Action Program for combating
desertification and Natural Resources Management (PAN-LCD/GRN). It is one of the
six priority sub-programs of the National Environment Program for a sustainable
Development in Niger (PNEDD). It results from a process coordinated by the
Secretariat of PAN-LCD/GRN Technical Committee established by decision
N°066/PM of August 22nd , 1997.
It is important to recall that the process of designing the PAN-LCD/GRN,
resulting from the one that led to the designing of the PNEDD, is based on the main
following elements:
(cid:1) The PAN/LCD-GRN is built on national capacities and sized in relation to
the context of the country;
(cid:1) The participatory approach enabled to involve, at all the levels, the various
stakeholders, namely the population and the civil society interested in
desertification and natural resources management issues;
(cid:1) The taking into account and integration of achievements and provisions of
the convention on desertification control;
(cid:1) The PAN/LCD-GRN is a participatory process with three stages which are
its elaboration, its implementation and its continuous evaluation;
(cid:1) The establishment of consultation framework through the setting up of a
technical committee in charge of designing the PAN/LCD-GRN;
(cid:1) The information and sensitization of the various stakeholders on the CCD
through eight regional workshops;
(cid:1) The realization of national, regional and sub-regional diagnostic
assessments on the environmental issue;
(cid:1) The realization of supplementary thematic studies in the environment area
(Agriculture, livestock, water resources, forest, wildlife);
On the basis of the approach selected during the different meetings of the
Technical Secretariat of the aforesaid committee, this document was submitted to
regions for contributions and a national validation workshop should perfect its
designing process.
From the exercise emerge phenomena of desertification and natural resources
degradation that have been and still constitute a major concern in the economic and
social development of Niger. Facing such a situation, the state continues to develop
numerous initiatives and conduct actions likely to preserve the productive basis in
order to ensure a sustainable productivity.
To this matter, the National Debate on Desertification Control held in Maradi in
1984 would have been the starting point for the formalization of a national awareness

--- Page 8 ---
8
and a political commitment of Niger about problems of desertification and sustainable
natural resources management. Notable results have been recorded, but their impact
could have been more meaningful had the approach been more global. From the
commitment of Maradi to date the results are among others:
- the production of 80,000,000 saplings which would correspond to an
average reforestation of 8,000 hectares per year
- The development of about 480,000 hectares of forests
- the restoration of 107,000 ha of degraded lands
- the realization of 22,000 km of firewalls
Source: Various reports of the Services of the Ministry in charge of Environment
The implementation of the actions proposed by the current document which is
the result of a consensual approach among the different actors and which will enable
to face more effectively desertification phenomena, alleviate drought effects and
ensure a sustainable management of natural resources.
The methodology of designing the current document comprises three stages:
⇒ the identification and analysis of different factors which contribute
to desertification, drought and to the degradation of natural resources;
⇒ the synthesis of thematic studies above mentioned;
⇒ the designing of the PAN-LCD/GRN through a diagnostic
assessment of the past actions in terms of desertification control natural
resources management and the new strategy proposals and the
implementation framework
The document is structured in three main chapters:
⇒ General context,
⇒ Diagnostic Assessment of Combating Desertification and
Management of Natural Resources
⇒ National Action Program for Combating Desertification and the
Management of Natural Resources (PAN-LCD/GRN).

--- Page 9 ---
9
Chapter I
General Context
I.1. Geographical Situation
Niger, a totally land locked country, covers a surface of 1,267,000 Km and is located
between longitudes 0°16’ and 16° East and latitudes 11°01’ and 23°17’ North. Its
nearest border to the coast is at more than 600 Km from the Guinea Gulf. The three
quarters of this surface are situated in the Northern zone in hot desert.
At the relief plan, it is a peneplain which is both immense and monotonous, of
average altitude of 300 meters in which exist here and there depressions invaded
sometimes by sands and regions heightened by volcanic actions in the northern pout
of the country (isolated massifs of the air).
At the hydrographic plan, Niger is run across in its western part, on about 550 Km, by
only one river, the one it owns its name and in the cast by an almost permanent river,
the Komadougou. At the furthest East of the country there is the Lake Chad whose
North-west part belongs to Niger; that is to say 300 Km². Other lakes and streams
more or less permanent exist in the country
I.2. Ecological Context
I.2.1. Climatic characteristics
The country climate is particularly dry. Niger belongs, in fact, to one the hottest zones
of the globe. It has two types of hot climates: a desert climate on the major part of its
surface, and a tropical climate with only one rainy season. There are four seasons.
- A season said cool units with temperatures that could go below 10°c and
even 0°c in the Northern zone of the country;
- A dry and not season (March-may) with burning winds and temperatures
that can be superior to 45°C;
- A rainy season (June-September) characterized by rains, sometimes
thunder, a high humidity and an average temperature of 33°C;
- A hot season without rain (October-to Middle December) with a relative
humidity and an average temperature of 35°C.
The evaporation is intense and varies between 1700 mm and 2100 mm of water per
year; the climatic hydrous deficit is therefore important during the dry season and for
the flora, to survive, it must draw from the underground reserves. The rain fall is
characterized by a strong variation in space and time. That is how we can distinguish,
according to this rainfall, from the North to the South of the country, the following four
zones.
• The Sahara zone in the North of the country represents around
65% of the national territory, with very scarce rains. The rainfall remains
always inferior to 100 mm per year and the dry season is very long with
average temperatures higher than 35° C. We are in the presence of a
desert climate.

--- Page 10 ---
10
• The sahelo-Saharian (12.2% of the national territory) with rain a
very low rainfall comprised between 100 an 300 mm per year; rivers are
temporary, flowing after important atmospheric precipitations. We have,
here, a sub-desertic climate;
• The sahelo-Sudanian zone (21,9% of the national territory)
comprising a drier Sahelian part in the North devoted mainly to nomadic
breeding with a rainfall varying from 300 to 600 mm and a more watered
Sudanian part in the South;
• The sudanian zone which receives more than 600 mm of rains per
year represents 0.90% of the national territory.
In Niger, the annual rainfall characterized by a space and time and inter-annual
variability, has consequences on agricultural productions. It must be emphasized that
drought can persist there, as observed during the 1970’s and 1980’s decades.
I.2.2. Natural Resources
a) Lands
In Niger, lands are generally poor in nutritive elements and in organic matters
content. The possible surface suitable for cultivation is estimated at 15 millions
hectares, representing less than 12% of the total surface of the country. It must be
noted that 80 to 85% of land suitable for cultivation are sand hills and only 15 to 20%
of land suitable for cultivation are sand hills and only 15 to 20% are hydromorphic
lands fairly clayey (SEDES, 1987). These lands less productive and fragile ate very
sensitive to hydrous and wind erosion. Most exploited lands suffer from a serious
deficiency in phosphates (Bationo, 1991). The potential in irrigated Land is estimated
at 270,000 hectares, that is to say 4% of the total surface of which 140,000hectares
are situated in the river Niger valley.
In addition, because of the demographic pressure and the weakness of agriculture
intensification, for the six main crops (millet, sorghum, beans, rice, groundnut,
maize), cultivated surfaces passed from 3.1 millions hectares, that is to say 21% of
lands suitable for cultivation in 1965, to 13.9 millions hectares that is to say 93% of
lands suitable for cultivation in 1999; the result is an increase of 72% of lands
suitable for cultivation for the considered period ; however, it is important to balance
these figures by taking into account the dominant river crops system which is the
association of millet – beans.
Referring to the preceding climatic zoning for a total surface of 126.70 millions hectares (
Mha) we would have:
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) 15.46 millions hectares (12.2%) in Sahelo-Saharian zone (100-300 mm
rainfall) with soils less improved from aeolian contribution and dark red
soils dominantly sandy;
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) 27.74 millions hectares (21.9%) in Sahelo-Sudanian zone (300-600 mm
rainfall) with tropical ferruginous soils;
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) 1.14 mha (0.9%) in sudanian zone (> 600 mm rainfall) with ferruginous
soils
The mountainous area and the great plateaus (Aïr, Ader Doutchi, continental
terminal) are dominated by lithosoils. Fossil valleys (Dallols, Goulbi, Korama), the

--- Page 11 ---
11
river valleys, the Komadougou, Lake Chad and Manga basins are essentially
dominated by hydromorphic soils and vertisoils.
b) Waters
The country equally has important surface and underground hydrous potentials
(Master Plan of Water Resources, 1998).
The identified surface waters essentially in the southern part come mostly from
external contributions. Surface waters are shared among the following hydrological
Units (Map I.1.in annex) :
(cid:2) river Niger and its right bank tributaries (average quantity of flowed out
water is around 31 billion m3 per year, surfaces liable to flooding: 63.000
ha);
(cid:2) Ader-Doutchi-Maggia (average quantity of flowed out water : around 2
billion m3 per year);
(cid:2) dallols ( fossil valleys);
(cid:2) Coulbis (at present without any significant flowing)
(cid:2) Koromas (the rate is linked to rains and to the pouring out of water tables
contained in the sub-stratum of the concerned valleys);
(cid:2) The Komadougou Yobé which carries 500 millions m3 per year in Niger
territory. This flow is today reduced by the building of numerous dams in its
upper watershed.
(cid:2) Lake Chad (completely drained in Niger territory with a slow return
following to the heavy rains of 1998);
(cid:2) Lake Madarounfa;
(cid:2) The Aïr Koris, characterized by strong floods of short duration, carry almost
100 millions m3 of water per year, feeding essentially water tables of the
region;
(cid:2) Ponds and artificial water retention;
(cid:2) Oases.
Several regional and sub-regional organizations are set up to encourage mainly
common management of surface resources (NBA, LCBC).
Underground waters are distinguished in:
(cid:2) Renewable hydrous resources whose availability is evaluated to about
2000 billion m3 and presently less than 20% are exploited and,
(cid:1) Non- renewable hydrous resources whose reserves are estimated at some
200 billions m3 (MHE, 1995).
c) Vegetation
In its aspect and composition the vegetation reflects the pedological and climatic
conditions of the area. Thus we can distinguish the following large bioclimatic areas:
(cid:2) The Saharian domain where the vegetation, when it exists, is a
discontinuous steppe, generally taking shelter in the depressions;

--- Page 12 ---
12
(cid:2) The Sahelian domain which corresponds in practice to the Niger inhabited
part which concerns the part of the territory comprised between the Saharian
North and the South urban occupation part. This area is characterized by a
vegetation passing from contracted formation or clear shrubs to types more
diffuse and planted with trees in the South;
(cid:3) The Sahelo-Sudanian area is characterized by a discontinuous herbaceous
Savannah and a low density shrub stratum more wooded in humid shallows;
(cid:2) The Sudanian area covers the most Southern part of the Country. More
wooded than the Sahel, it comprises a Savannah vegetation, characterized by
a herbaceous stratum more continuous or not. The ligneous stratum
comprises bushes and trees capable of constituting locally closed populations.
The vegetation is globally characterized by combretaceae and by the
presence of some valuable species like the shea tree (vitelaria paradoxum),
the néré (parkia biglobosa), etc.
d) Wildlife
The various bioclimatic stages and ecosystems of Niger screen a rich wildlife and
very diversified. Up to now only vertebrates and especially the mammals have
retained the attention of scientific (SNBA/DB – 1998). It comprises representatives of
Sudanian domain, in the south of the Sahelian area and Saharian desert domain.
The knowledge of the major part of animal especies remains limited (mammals,
birds, reptiles, amphibians, fishes, invertebrates, etc) as well as the natural habitats.
The recent studies carried out, in the framework of the elaboration processes of the
national strategy and the action plan in matter of biological diversity conservation,
retained that Niger has, at the present stage of our knowledge, 3 200 animal species
of which 168 mammals and 512 birds. The rest is constituted by reptiles, amphibians,
fishes etc (SNPA/DB-1998).
These figures should be increased with up dated knowledge on the role and the
diversity of the microbial flora.
Besides its recognized importance in the protein alimentation of communities, wildlife
has always been an interest center namely the pharmacopoeia, culture and vision
tourism. It represents an indicator of environment quality. But the unfavorable
aspects to wildlife development mentioned above, combined to disastrous effects of
repetitive droughts, have reduced the wildlife potential to less than 10% of what it
was in the 1960’s. Its specific composition reveals also that several species have
disappeared or are in the process of disappearing.
The reduction of humid zones surfaces, preferential habitat of numerous birds
and some rare mammals (sea cow, hippopotamus), as well as human activities lead
to a change in the behavior of migrating species (SNPA/DB – 1998).
I.3. Socio-economic context
I.3.1. Population
Like other developing countries in general and the Sahel in particular, Niger is facing
with:

--- Page 13 ---
13
(cid:3) An accelerated population growth (annual increase rate is 3,3%);
(cid:3) A very high fertility level (synthetic fertility rating is 7.4 children per woman);
(cid:3) A mortality level relatively high (infantile mortality rate is 123 for thousand
and maternal mortality is 6,5%);
(cid:3) A quite young structure of its population (49,5% are less than 15 years old);
(cid:3) An unequal space distribution (75% of its population live on 25% of the
national territory);
(cid:3) A rapid urbanization of its population: 25.1% of the population live in urban
area in 1993 (source pop sahel n°26-October 1997) against 13% in 1977 (RGP –
1977) ;
(cid:3) A higher percentage of women who represent about 52% of the population;
(cid:3) A poor school attendance rate
The population is made up of eight (8) socio-lingustic groups of which two form nearly
80% of the numbers (Hausa and the Songhaï-Zarma). These groups islamized at
more than 95% share common values in their rapport with environment issues as
well as in matters of space management in general and the access to natural
resources in particular. Nigeriens are divided into sedentary and nomads. However,
the proportion of these last which is falling continuously following recurrent droughts.
The Niger population is very unequally distributed on the territory . In fact, the three
quarters remain concentrated in Southern zones South to the 16th parallel on about
a quarter of the total surface of the country. The average density is 6 inhabitants/km²;
it is less than 1 inhabitant/km² in the region of Agadez, and it is 34.7 or 80
inhabitants/km² in that of Maradi (RGP-1988). This population concentration poses in
some zones a serious suitability problem with agricultural production levels which is
continuously falling, recording more and more important structural cereal deficits
(Map I.2 in annex).
The increasing mobility of the population which is brought into effect at internal and
external levels, has important consequences on the geographic distribution, and for
that, at the level of pressure exercised on natural resources. This travelling linked
especially to socio-economic constraints; but may be situational and generate
important incomes which unfortunately have not induced a notable transformation of
the production systems.
Facing with major challenges posed by the satisfaction of basic needs of the
population, the Government designed in 1992, a National Population Policy whose
objective is to achieve a control of population growth and migratory flows in order to
adjust them to an economic development conditions aiming at a substantial
qualitative improvement of standards of living namely in rural area.
I.3.2. Agriculture
Every year nearly 99% of cultivated surfaces are allocated to pluvial agriculture. The
major constraint of this agriculture resides in the insufficiency in water for the crops ;
this insufficiency really displays a weak capacity of surface waters mobilization and
access to underground waters. To this constraint is added the low fertility of the
lands, the parasitic pressures, insufficiency of loans consecutive to the Government

--- Page 14 ---
14
disengagement from agricultural sector, reducing thus the access to fertilizers and
the inappropriate technical itineraries.
We note a strong expansion of lands allocated to cereal food crops (main
speculations) because of the low intensification of production systems.
This crops lands expansion is done through the exploitation of marginal lands, that
which contributes to the acceleration of lands and pasturage degradation. the
productivity (outputs) fall, consequently reducing the contribution of agriculture to
GDP and exacerbating the persisting issue of food security.
The low performances recorded by agriculture in Niger are the result of
a general situation marked essentially by the following factors:
(cid:4) The persistence of extensive character of production systems;
(cid:4) The fall of yield;
(cid:4) The high costs of production means and the lowness of rural credit
systems;
(cid:4) The low price at producers level and lack of effective structures of fertilizers
marketing and supplying;
(cid:4) The low performances of research and popularization systems;
(cid:4) The inadequacy of Research-Training-Extension-Development systems.
I 3.3. Breeding
Breeding constitutes the second economic activity in Niger. Availability and access to
water, pasturage are the major constraints. Besides, the bad distribution of pastoral
hydraulic facilities all over the country leads to the overexploitation or even the
destruction of some pastoral ecosystems whereas others are practically non
exploited.
Until 1973, national policies on breeding have been centered on the livestock
sanitary state improvement and the conduct of a pastoral hydraulic policy dominated
by the construction of drillings equipped with pumping stations. The result was the
increase of numbers up to the early 1970’s and, consequently, the increase of the
pastoral charge often without relation with the milieu capacities. After the 1973
drought, these policies have been dominated by livestock reconstitution efforts. With
the Tahoua Action Plan, strategies in breeding end up in taking into account
environmental aspects and charge capacity of the milieu.
Breeding contribution to GDP formation is in constant fall (20.7% of the GDP in 1961;
17.1% in 1975; 16.5% in 1984 and 12.8% in 1991) because of low performances of
breeding systems (low intensification level) combined with recurrent droughts
disastrous effects which decimate regularly the livestock for thirty years. This sub-
sector adapted itself to this situation through a significant modification of herds
composition and a transfer of numbers from pastoral zone to Southern agricultural
regions more favorable, but also more populated, that which provokes more often
conflicts among breeders and farmers.
I.3.4. Forestry

--- Page 15 ---
15
As for Forestry, national policies in the matter evolved three decades ago from a
“conservative” attitude to a strategy of Desertification control and the integrated
management of the whole of natural resources. It is in this framework that a National
Plan for combating Desertification (PNLCD) has first been designed, then a Natural
Resources Management Project (PGRN).
Between 1982 and 1989, an inventory of forest resources (except the region of
Agadez) enabled to estimate in a global way, the productive potential at 16 millions
ha (of which 11,600,000 ha of marginal forest lands and 440,000 ha of forest lands
which could be developed). Their productivity is very poor varying from 0.1 to 1.5
stere/ha/year (PUSF, 1982, 1989). The supplying of urban population represents
about 12% of the total demand of the country. The natural forest formations provide
about 87% of the population energy needs in wood, that is to say the equivalent of
2.5 to 3 millions tons per year of which 150.000 tons for the sole needs of Niamey
city (Projet Energie II, 1991).
The supplying of urban populations represents about 12% of the global demand of
the country. These same forest formations provide almost the totality of wood at the
service of populations estimated at 113.000 tons in 1993 (Projet Energie II). Because
of the demographic growth, this consumption is to double in the coming years, hence
the risk to accentuate the green cover degradation whose production is already low.
The “wood-energy assessment” of regions indicates that most regions are in deficit.
The supplying in wood comes up in a particularly acute manner in regions of Tahoua,
Maradi, Tillaberi and Zinder. To cope with this situation, the country has developed
alternative situations, namely in the area of new and renewable energies. Several
programs are thus elaborated in this framework: domestic energy project; Urban gas
project ; charcoal project… These programs encountered enormous difficulties in
their implementation; However, wood rural markets whose principle is based on
empowering villagers in the management of their areas, obtain positive results
unanimously appreciated.
I.3.5. Fishing
The richness of Niger waters in fishes is a major advantage for the food security of
the country because fish, in many cases, is the main source of proteins. The
exploitation and development of fish resources contribute equally, in a decisive way,
to the GDP and to the balance of payments therefore to poverty control.
Niger surface waters in which fishing activities are carried out over about 600,000 ha.
The levels of lakes and rivers waters (River Niger, Komadougou) fluctuate from one
year to the other and according to seasons. These waters screen a great biological
diversity of which the most exploited is the itchy- fauna, represented by 112 species.
Fish production has been very variable these last years. In fact, in piscicultural
stations, controlled fish production has passed from 20,000 tons in the 1970’s to
5,000 tons in 1986, whereas the normal potential is estimated at 30,000 tons per
year.
Beyond drought, we can note, among others, the silting up of lakes and rivers
accelerated up stream by deforestation, wind and hydrous erosion, anarchic
occupation and without thinking of the flooding plains (reproduction areas). Another
more worrying phenomenon is the infestation of lakes and rivers by invading plants. It
is the case of the water hyacinth in Niger. The negative effects of all these factors on

--- Page 16 ---
16
the aquatic habitat have resulted in the disappearance of eight (8) species during the
catching by the river Niger fishermen. That which is a great loss for the biological
diversity of Niger. If actions (preservation of river banks, plantations, integrated
developed Lands, water hyacinth control and the implementation of the law N°98-042
of 29 December 1998 relating to fishing) are not undertaken at a very short term to
reverse the trend, Niger is risking to lose the contribution of the fishing sector to the
national economy, estimated every year, on average, at more than twelve billions
francs CFA/year.
I.3.6. Industry, Tourism and Mines
To maintain its economic growth, Niger opted for an industrialization strategy through
the substitution to importation by enhancing the value of local resources (Coal,
Uranium, Gold, Agricultural and Animal products transformation). In the case of
Niamey city where there is a high concentration of industrial units, up to a recent date
only few studies have been carried out in order to assess industrial activities impact
on the environment.
Niger has an important tourist potential. It is question namely of wildlife, various lands
capes, Game parks, cultural and historical sites encouraging the development of an
Eco-tourism and a vision tourism. At present, tourist activity is mainly concentrated in
two regions, namely the North of the country and the river Niger region comprising
the National W Game Park.
Finally, on mining level, the various prospecting works undertaken from the
colonial period to date enabled to give prominence of mineralization clues located in
geographic areas well individualized or provinces susceptible to contain minerals.
Among the thirty mineral substances which constitute the mining potential of Niger,
only uranium, coal, limestone, gypsum, phosphate, tin, salt, natron are exploited. It
fits to note that since the 1960’s, gold is the subject of small scale exploitation, but its
industrial exploitation begins (1996). About petroleum exploitation which started in
1958, it enabled to give proof of clues and hydrocarbon reserves respectively in
Djado and Agadem Basins.
I.4. Socio-political context
Three decades after the great decolonization wave, Niger began in 1991 its
democratization process. Since then, the development policies are registered in an
institutional framework characterized by recurrent tensions, a slow down of the
administrative machinery and a poor participation of the civil society. The law state
and democracy which constitute the reference values of the political system which is
establishing itself, are still to be strengthened in Niger.
In view of the importance of challenges of development, Niger authorities chose the
political option to make of decentralization the institutional response to the issue of
populations participation to national development.
Thus empowering populations in relation to the environment must finally take
into account basic objectives aimed at by the grassroots communities. However, if

--- Page 17 ---
17
laws relative to decentralization are promulgated, it remains that the concrete sitting
of local is still expected.

--- Page 18 ---
18
Chapter II
Diagnostic Assessment of Combating Desertification and Natural Resources
Management
II.1 The issue of Combating desertification and Natural
Resources Management
II.1.1 The Issue
In Niger, it is obvious that problems of desertification and degradation of
natural resources are becoming an acute issue. The climate, the demographic
pressure and exploitation methods of the environment constitute decisive factors of
these scourges. The major issue is expressed through a certain number of
contradictions or paradoxes having significant consequences on the country’s rural
development whose resolution turned out to be imperative for an efficient socio-
economic development. It’s about :
• The search for food security in a persistence context of unfavorable
climatic conditions;
• The rational natural resources management and demographic pressure on
these resources followed by practices and exploitation methods not
respectful of the environment;
• The control of drought effects before the economic recession that the
country goes through and the poverty situation of the population;
• The struggle against rural population poverty and the low level of
agriculture and breeding productions, populations main sources of income.
The evidence of these contradictions and dilemmas which challenge the
natural environment, man and his exploitation methods are emphasizing the
desertification phenomenon.
II.1.2 Desertification factors and their consequences in Niger
II.1.2.1 At the national level
a) The Climate
At climatic level, it is obvious today that climatic variability and desertification
are closely related. In fact, important inter-annual and inter-seasonal variability have
caused rainfall decreases that can reach 20 to 40% of the last 50 years average. (
Atlas AGRHYMET 1998).These droughts have started the natural resources
degradation. Thus, we witness deep modifications of the green cover, and wildlife,
fish resources. These modification are linked either to the reduction or the
disappearance of certain species.

--- Page 19 ---
19
The modification of the green cover results in the development of wind and
water erosions very high followed by fertile lands loss and a total or partial drainage
of rivers and stretch of water plans.
b) The human pressure on natural resources and their exploitation methods.
Climate negative effects on the natural resources are today worsened by the
rapid population growth and exploitation practices of the environment for agriculture,
breeding and industrial productions. These situation is seriously worsening the
development of poverty and the degradation of environment both in rural and urban
environment.
Another aspect aggravating the ecological imbalance is the large unequal
geographical distribution of this population of which 75% live in the southern part on
quarter of the total surface of the territory. This part of the country which contains the
essential of agriculture and breeding potential is thus submitted to intense human
and animal pressure which is expressed by lands crops extension, overgrazing and
clearing. The phenomena of lands extension generates countless conflicts among
farmers and breeders and the reduction of classified and protected spaces. As an
example, if the level of this pressure is kept, the forestry resources of Niger are
estimated at 13 millions hectares in 1980 will be reduced by 4 millions by the year
2020 (PAFT 1991). These resources are therefore exposed to the total
disappearance at the rate of the rapid population growth and the demand in firewood.
c) The low Technological Level and Poverty
The increasing impoverishment of the rural population exacerbated by an
economical crisis which continues unfortunately limits the adoption at large scale
intensification technologies (use of appropriate agricultural inputs, mechanization,
improved clearing adoption of speculations with added value) enabling to reverse
rapidly the tendency of environment degradation.
The intensification of productions in general is impeded by socio-economic
and mainly financial considerations. This situation compels the producers to use
practices less respectful of the environment (clearing; bush fires, hillsides
development, lack or reduction of fallow period). The performances of the rural sector
which uses more than 80% of the population remain globally insufficient.
At the economic level, desertification and drought have had negative
consequences on the economy in general and on the agricultural GDP in particular.
Finally, at the social level desertification and drought provoked international, regional
and transnational movements of populations which often compelled the state to
resort to food assistance.
II.1.2.2. At the regional level
Besides the general problems of lands degradation that Niger faces, certain
regions present degradation problems which are specific to them. These are among
others:

--- Page 20 ---
20
(cid:3) The whole region of Agadez as well as the northern regions of Maradi,
Tahoua, Zinder, Tillaberi and Diffa, areas of bush fire forecast and submitted
to a strong wind erosion and sitting;
(cid:3) The valleys of the river, of Ader-Doutchi-Maggia, of the Tarka, of Goulbin
Kaba and of the Aïr, area submitted to a strong hydrous erosion;
(cid:3) The agricultural dune lands of the regions of Maradi, Dosso and south-
Zinder, cereal culture zone for excellence which have a strong reduction of
soils fertility related to a strong demographic pressure and non-adapted
production systems, as by the way, in all agricultural zones;
(cid:3) The National reserves games W and its peripheral zones, zones submitted
to strong anthropic pressures.
As an example, Tables II.2.1 and II.2.2 in annex, give a detailed summary for
each of the regions about forestry and agro-forestry potentialities/constraints as well
as their conditions and, population and production indicators. In short, information on
natural resources potentials and constraints are still fragmentary even sometimes
contradictory, consequently there is a need to deepen the information by:
- Exhaustive inventories of natural resources;
- Study of the dynamics and the operation of ecosystems;
- Etc.
II.2 Elements of policies and strategies, plans and programs regarding
LCD/GRN
II.2.1. Multi-sectorial policies adapted to present requirements
It is with the 1973 drought that Niger, promoted and implemented real policies
and strategies about desertification control, natural resources management and
alleviating drought effects. Until 1972, Niger faced food self sufficiency, related to
ecological balance and an important livestock. At that time, the only concerns were
available natural resources conservation, the development of cash crops for the
search of foreign currencies and maintenance of a good animal health. These set up
policies and strategies experienced approaches evolutions according to new
ecological and social realities as well as the intended economic development
policies. We distinguish several outstanding periods corresponding to specific
policies and strategies.
a) The period 1973-1983 was marked by a series of droughts having dramatic
consequences (1972-1973 and 1983-1984). These situations have led to deep
changes in the global rural development policy of the 60’s (emphasis on cash crops).
Thus, in the field of environment management, the <<conservationist>> policy
is replaced by a policy of desertification control following the drastic reduction of
natural resources and productive potential degradation. During that period, the main
instrument of this scourge control is the large scale reforestation through the
implementation of a large number of projects with the support of external donors,
which unfortunately provided mitigated results. In fact, the droughts which succeeded
brought out the precariousness of food balance and led to the establishment of food
self-sufficiency policy.

--- Page 21 ---
21
Thus, in order to find food self-sufficiency of the 60’s, the development of
staple food as indicated above, became the strategy axe which was translated in the
field by:
(cid:3) Giving up support to cash crops,
(cid:3) Promotion of productivity projects which seek to increase productivity by the
dissemination of technological packages in the rural area namely plow
farming, inputs, agricultural and rural loans grant;
(cid:3) Development of hydrous and agricultural lands;
(cid:3) The setting up of several support institutions and organizations to
production and marketing (UNC, CNCA, etc)
The development of food crops is doubled with another strategy of forecast
and droughts management in a hardly controllable climatic context. Thus, the state
carried out :
Regarding forecast:
(cid:3) The setting up and strengthening of meteorological and hydrological
forecast systems;
(cid:3) The setting up of early warning and natural disasters management
mechanisms;
(cid:3) The setting up of food security stocks
(cid:3) The setting up of an agricultural campaign follow up and evaluation
Regarding management:
(cid:3) To the support to agricultural products importation through the suppression
of import taxes;
(cid:3) To the development of high intensity man-power activities in order to
forecast migratory movement;
(cid:3) To the promote and development of off season farming
(cid:3) To the regulation of cereal market through the injection in the market of
agricultural products resulting from stabilization stocks;
(cid:3) To the mobilization of food aid from the partners.
As far as pastoral development, is concerned, important losses recorded
during 1972-73 and 1983-84 droughts have shown the limits of livestock
development policy based on sanitary protection. The three-year program 1976-1978
and the five-year plan 1979-1983 set up the new orientations policies in this area.
These new orientations are based on the improvement of livestock productivity so as
to ensure internal consumption and exports.
b) The period 1984 to today has been characterized by social charges
(National conference and democratic process), the up heavily of desertification
control strategies and the search for food self-sufficiency of the past decade, as well
as the awareness of environment issues in full since “CNEDD”. Furthermore, faced
with the worsening of natural resources degradation problems and the persistence of
cereals deficit, deep reflections were engaged about the efficiency of strategies and

--- Page 22 ---
22
the approaches selected regarding desertification control and the search for food
self-sufficiency:
II.2.2. Plans Programs and projects
In the framework of these reflections, a seminar on intervention strategies in
rural area was organized in 1982 in Zinder during which a critical analysis of
approaches was done. Moreover, the year 1984 recorded the holding of another
meeting on LCD in Maradi (Maradi debate) from which the LCD strategy was
examined in the research of for an efficiency of interventions (Maradi commitment).
Thus, the government decided the following measures: at all region local
governments and districts head quarters levels, the authorities must imperatively and
annually. Proceed to the delimitation of areas in which trees will be planted:
(cid:1) 5 ha per district;
(cid:1) 10 ha per local government
(cid:1) 15 ha per department
Similar measures were simultaneously taken at villages, hydro agricultural
fitting outs, mosques and public places levels. Maradi commitment infused a constant
dynamic regarding reforestation, consolidated by the institutionalization of the
national tree day (August 3rd) which marks henceforth the national independence day
celebration.
From Maradi debate, desertification control was placed in the global context
food self sufficiency search. That is why reforestation strategy was completed by
other strategic axes namely, the production systems improvement, natural resources
management in an integrated approach and the populations sense of responsibility.
In order to materialize this new orientation, a national plan of desertification
control was designed in 1985. This plan adopted by the government enabled the
realization of many actions. It was reviewed in 1991 to serve as national policy and
strategy in desertification control and advocate an integrated approach and an
increased sense of responsibility of the populations. A year after the Maradi meeting,
another debate on breeding was held in Tahoua from which an Action Plan for
Breeding development was designed and which advocates an approach which gives
farmers sense of responsibility in an action integration approach.
All these sectorial reflections selected the actions integration and the
populations responsibility as strategies and approaches of food self-sufficiency and
desertification control policy implementation. This global and integrated vision was
materialized by the setting up and adoption of a reference political strategic
framework: the ordinance 92-030 of July 8, 1992 relating to Guiding principles of
Rural Development Policy (PDPDR) in Niger whose one which are subjected to the
axes is GRN following the <<area>> approach. During that period, it has been noted
a better consideration of concerns relating to GRN with the setting up of a large GRN
program and the designing (in 1992) of a Tropical Forest Action Plan (PAFT) for the
management of natural forest resources which are subjected to an increasing
degradation. Unfortunately this plan was not adopted; however, this did not prevent
the realization of important development actions of forest resources among which:

--- Page 23 ---
23
- Village forestry development through Energy II project;
- Development of natural made spaces (Gueselbodi, Hamadidie,
Goroubasounga, Baban Rafi, etc).
Besides, it is worthmentioning that significant operations have been realized in
CES/DRS, in protection and duns fixation as well as, plantation and lands
management, from 1990 to 1998 in the various regions of the country; these
realization are (Environment conditions in Niger, 2000)
- 180,000 ha and 6,300 Km for CES/DRS actions;
- 7,000 ha of dunes fixation and 11,300 of 11,300 ha of protection;
- 48,500 a group plantations and 20,000 Km of linear plantations.
Besides, other economic, social and environmental development plans as well
as sectorial strategies having LCD interest have been designed and implemented: It
is essentially about:
(cid:2) The economic and social development plan 1987-1991 which presents
desertification as a major challenge to take up and propose a rigorous combat
against this scourge;
(cid:2) The economic revival program (adopted in 1997) like LCD, through the
PNEDD, is one of the four priority axes. In fact, this program forecasts the
improvement of the production system performances through LCD/GRN
actions;
(cid:2) Projects and strategies regarding population, poverty control, bio diversity
conservation, energy, land management, etc.
Nevertheless, in view of certain indexes (Human development Index, increase
of urban and rural poverty, reductions of agricultural yields, natural resources
degradation, etc.). we can claim that these policies, strategies, plans and actions
have already been above the expectations of a sustainable development.
In the perspective of the PAN/LCD-GRN implementation, there is a need to
proceed first to impact assessment of carried out actions.
II.2.3. Analysis of the resources mobilization strategy.
In analyzing mobilized resources situation for combating desertification it is
today difficult in lack of reliable data, to number the levels of human, financial and
material resources invested in desertification control and natural resources
management. However, the available data show that important efforts were made in
these areas.
a) Human Resources
Important actions were achieved in the framework of recommendations
resulting from Maradi debate, thanks to voluntary mobilization of certain population
strata, namely young people (National Participation Service) and women with the
support of NGOs, technical services and development projects. Particularly for

--- Page 24 ---
24
women it is noted a physical massive participation representing most often more than
50% workers present on the sites, a proportion which can reach 95% in the
framework of certain projects implementation (reforestation sites of PDR-ADM/Keita-
FAO, PASP-GTZ, PDRT-GTZ, PBVT-European Union, etc.). This strong feminine
presence on the sites is only due slightly to men exodus; it is also explained by
motivations. But, population participation which is expressed by actions sometimes
sparse and selective, remained up to now below what the phenomenon
(desertification) scale would require and whose impact goes far beyond National
borders. This situation is linked to the lowness of services offer to which the
weakness and intrinsic limits of social mobilization strategies and populations sense
of responsibility are added. These are insufficiencies which have heavily hindered
human resources development at the grassroots level and competencies, making
hypothetical thus the effectiveness of populations participation to LCD/GRN actions.
On the other hand, the strong presence of women on sites is partly due to men
exodus or immediate remuneration (food for work/cash for work); also it is
understood by proper motivations which express the awareness rising of the need to
rehabilitate their milieu.
But, popular participation which is translated by sparse and punctual actions
has been up to now below what would require the magnitude of the phenomenon
(desertification) whose impact exceeds largely the national borders. This situation is
namely linked to intrinsic limitations of social mobilization and population
empowerment strategies. These are insufficiencies which heavily hindered human
resources development at the grassroots level and skills, thus making hypothetical
the effectiveness of populations participation to LCD/GRN actions.
In the government’s disengagement perspective and because of LCD/GRN
actions sustainability reasons, the authorities have given priority to development at
the grassroots level according to the participatory approach. Also, it has been noticed
for some years the emergence of around 250 NGOs (of which 131 deal with
environment sector in rural communities.
b) Financial resources
Since Maradi debate, the government and communities have done their
utmost,, with the support of development partners, to devote more financial resources
to the environment management, despite the low growth of national economy. Table
II.3 in annex accounts for a couple o projects which scheduled at the beginning an
aspect of LCD or GRN, but whose execution has not been realized in most cases.
But, a certain number of obstacles limited the financial resources mobilization at
the national level. They are:
(cid:3)The low national economy competitiveness and the burden of external debt;
(cid:3) The low internal resources mobilization;
(cid:3) The low gross formation of the fixed capital and a low self-funding capacity at
the local and national levels;
(cid:3) The low external resources mobilization
(cid:3) The low participation of the private sector;
(cid:3) The low credits absorption capacity

--- Page 25 ---
25
(cid:3) The low elaboration capacity and or projects management insufficient
valorization of national skills;
(cid:3) The low mobilized resources efficiency.
Despite all, quite important financial resources have been injected in
desertification control and environment protection for the period going from 1985 to
1997. The resources integrate both internal and external funding. Nevertheless, it
must be noted that a great part of the resources allocated in the framework of
projects is devoted to the operation for the detriment of concrete actions in the field.
The assessment of the government’s investment program from 1985 to 1997,
bring out a great disparity in funding of the rural sector financing. Globally, sub-
sectors agriculture and breeding have been object of particular attention by the
government. On the other hand Forest-wildlife and water resources, not less
important two sub-sectors, had modest and decreasing budgetary estimations, with
low of realization rates.
Besides the government contribution to LCD-GRN, as well as to all other
sectors, has not stopped falling since 1982, with the end of uranium boon.
At the local administrations level, the evolution of environmental activities
funding from 1984 to 1995 brings out that the credits allocated to the environment
sectors vary between 500,000 and 800,000 F a year and per collectivity. This
denotes the lowness of means allocated to them despite the advanced degradation
of the ecosystems. The execution rate for most of these budgets from 1984 to 1990
is between 50 to 80%. This situation is explained by the positive effects of Maradi
commitment which strengthened more the national awareness regarding
desertification control and natural resources management. But from 1991 to 1995,
the situation was suddenly deteriorated to reach the lowest level in 1995 (29,28%).
This could be explained by the scarcity of financial resources at national level. To
that, we must add the successive political crises and the financial embargo to which
Niger was subjected from the period 1990 today.
Regarding, national and international NGOs; financial estimations in
environmental activities funding field were almost entirely realized on a five year total.
Thus, on a total of about 13.8 billiard FCA, 12.5 billiards were effectively mobilized for
the operations funding. The years 1993 and 1994 experienced a realization rate
higher than the estimations, due to the interest revival shown by the international
community regarding the civil society and the decentralized cooperation.
As far as OCBs are concerned, mobilized amounts went from 22.5 millions F
CFA in 1990 to more than one billiard in 1995. This proceeds to the dynamism more
and more manifested by these organizations regarding the environment funding.
However, data analysis brings out disparities in funding environmental activities. In
fact, Dosso, Maradi, Tillaberi and Agadez are OCDs privileged intervention zones.
Let us finally note that a part from the government NGOs, Associations and
collectivities, beneficiary populations bring their physical and/or financial contribution.
Nevertheless, for want of reliable data, it is difficult to quantify this contribution.
II.3. LCD/GRN Regulatory juridical and institutional framework.

--- Page 26 ---
26
II.3.1. Legal and regulatory framework
Regarding environment protection and management Niger has, beside
conventions, international treaties and agreements that Niger has signed, legislative
and regulatory.
Today, there are more than 300 conventions, about 900 treaties and 35
international agreements entirely or partially consecrated to the protection and
management of the environment (source: study on the environment blueprint law-
MHE/ANUE/1998).
Niger agrees with several of these agreements, namely those derived from the
Rio summit in 1992. At internal level, there exists a multitude of legislative and
regulatory texts which have direct or indirect link with environment protection and
management; among others, it fits to name:
(cid:3) The July 18, 1999 constitution;
(cid:3) The law n° 97-024 of July 8, 1997 on the economic revival program
(cid:3) The law n° 98-56 of December 29, 1998 outlining the blueprint law on
environment management
(cid:3) The law n°74-7 of March 4, 1974, establishing the forest regime,
(cid:3) The law n° 96-05 of February 6, 1996 on the establishment of administrative
circumscriptions and territorial collectivities;
(cid:3) The law n° 96-06 of February 6, 1996 determining the basic principles of the
regions, departments and communes for self administration, as well as their
competencies and resources;
(cid:3) The law n° 98-048 of April 29, 1998 on hunting regulation and the wildlife
protection;
(cid:3) The law n° 98-042 of December 7, 1998 on fishing regulation in Niger
(cid:3) The law n°96-033 of May 24, 1996 on dangerous, unhealthy, or
inconvenient establishments;
(cid:3) The law n°93-014 of March 22, 1993 on water regime
(cid:3) The ordinance n°97-001 of January 1997, on institutionalization of
environment impact assessment;
(cid:3) The ordinance n° 93-015 of March 2, 1993 setting the rural code orientation
principles;
(cid:3) The ordinance n° 92-030 of July 8, 1992 on the adoption of master
principles of a rural development policy for Niger;
(cid:3) The ordinance n° 92-037 of August 21, 1992, on the marketing organization
and wood transportation in big urban centers, and the tax system applied to it;
(cid:3) The ordinance n°96-024 of May 30, 1996 related to the regulation of
naturalist institutions, savings and credit cooperatives
This legal arsenal shown if necessary, the concern of the state to set up laws
for environment management and natural resources, as well as the transfer of skills
and responsibility to grassroots communities. Nevertheless these texts application
often suffer from numerous breaches, namely because of lack of complementary
texts and lack of a concerted institutional follow up and evaluation framework.

--- Page 27 ---
27
The implementation of conventions, treaties and international agreements is
also carried out in an incoherent manner, that which does not encourage an efficient
and effective follow up of these tools.
The result is the necessity to carry out a better diffusion of the texts and follow
up their applicability in order to bring possible readjustments.
II.3.2. Institutional framework
Considering the pluri-disciplinary and multi-sector character of the combat
against desertification, the natural resources management (GRN) and the drought
effects diminishing (AES), several institutions are today directly or indirectly involved
at various stages. All these institutions were subjected to a diagnostic analysis which
enabled to know the role that they have played as well as the conflicts of competence
which resulted. They are, among others, Ministries of environment, rural
development, water resources, research and training, Mines/energy , etc sub-
regional, regional, international institutions (AGRYMET, NBA, ACMAD, ICRISAT,
etc.)
II.4. Drawn lessons
Insufficiencies revealed from past adopted strategies in combating
desertification (vision relatively sectorial and top down) led to the adoption of
methods more participatory, then responsibility.
In the field, one of the most significant success is incontestably populations
consciousness on desertification effects in their area and on the necessity to attach a
greater priority to the combat against this phenomenon. However, the results
obtained remain limited because of desertification phenomenon scope, the country’s
vastness and the limited means assigned to the combat against this scourge.
Thus, the food deficit situation remains nearly permanent despite the
implementation of programs and projects aiming at combating desertification and
increasing productivity. Thus, there is a permanent solicitation of early warning
system and disasters management (SAP/GG) mainly the management aspect of food
assistance so as to alleviate the drought impacts.
Other insufficiencies favored the precariousness of the food imbalance
namely:
(cid:3) The mismanaged liberalization of agriculture ( government disengagement
policy, namely through the suppression of agricultural credits and grants...),
has not enabled a real expansion of agricultural productions, hence, less
controlled rise in price of productions factors and agricultural products on the
markets,
(cid:3) Sometimes inadequate applications of technologies despite their
performances;
(cid:3) A bad partnership between development structures and the research ones;
(cid:3) A low impact assessment;

--- Page 28 ---
28
(cid:3) A weakness of the data basis on LCD and natural resources degradation;
(cid:3) Lack of organized and sustainable mechanism of LCD and GRN actions
funding;
Nevertheless, advantages have been recorded notably in the field and, at
institutional and legislation levels within the framework of agro-sylvo pastoral
activities of productivity for food security namely:
(cid:3) The promotion of an appropriate legislative, so as to improve the
management of natural resources (decentralization, rural code, forest code,
fishing law under review, hunting law, master principles for a rural
development policy in Niger, regulatory and legislative texts on the
exploitation and marketing of wood-energy, blueprint law on environment
etc.),
(cid:3) A beginning of partners empowerment materialized by a sharing of forest
incomes among the state, local communities and OCB’S (Wood rural
markets);
(cid:3) The braining of local stakeholders (farmers, association, etc.), among
others, at the technical and organization levels, in some projects intervention
areas;
(cid:3) Successful large scale actions in reforestation and soils conservation
realized at the local level with the full participation of populations (borrassus
projects sites PDR-ADM; PDRT, PBVT, Gao project/Dosso/FAC-UNSO, etc).
Aware of all these lessons and the validity of the interventions coordination in
combating desertification (CCD) elaborated this huge program for the welfare of its
current and future populations.

--- Page 29 ---
29
Chapter III
National Action Program for Combating Desertification and Natural Resources
Management (PAN/LCD-GRN)
III.1 Challenges, Objectives and Strategy of the PAN/LCD-GRN
III.1.1 Challenges
The improvement and permanence of the productive capital (Land, water, etc.)
on the one hand and that of the life framework on the other hand constitute the main
challenges of the LCD-GRN in Niger. Today, we notice that the productive capital of
our country is not capable of satisfying our basic needs, talkless of releasing a
surplus to invest. So in ensuring the permanence of this capital the main challenge,
the PAN/LCD gives itself as objectives those defined below, in order to enable a
happy change in the strategy implemented for a sustainable management of the
area.
III.1.2 Objectives
a) General objectives
Basically they are:
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) To identify factors which contribute to desertification and concrete measures to be
taken to combat it and alleviate drought effects;
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) To create favorable conditions to the improvement of food security, the solution to
domestic energy crisis, the economic development of the population, and their
empowerment in the management of natural resources.
b) Specific objectives
To reach these general objectives, PAN/LCD-GRN aims at the following
specific objectives:
(cid:3) To analyze and follow up the factors that contribute to drought and
desertification;
(cid:3) To promote a sustainable management of natural resources in the areas (to
organize, train and make the population participate in the sustainable
management of the natural resources);
(cid:3) To improve the production and the rural communities conditions of life
namely through the adoption of more appropriate technical ways;
(cid:3) To ensure an adequate funding of planned activities in the different sub-
programs.
III.1.3. National Strategy
The present exploitation methods of these natural resources, far from
contributing to the development, have rather encouraged the environment
degradation. This degradation is due to climatic and anthropogenic factors, has
reached today such a degree that it seriously mortgages this development. In order

--- Page 30 ---
30
to face this, Niger design a strategy whose main basic principles and axes are
presented below.
a) Basic Principles
Taking into consideration the national context, the letter and spirit of the United
Nations Convention on Desertification Control, the national strategy for desertification
control and natural resources management relies on basic principles of which the
most important are:
• An integrated and Global approach
The problem of the desertification issue in Niger has evidenced the complexity
of the relationships among the different elements which underline the realities of food
insecurity, poverty, natural resources management and energy crisis. But, the
analysis of the evolution of desertification control and natural resources management
strategies showed the limitation of isolated actions and sectorial interventions in the
search for solutions to degradation problems in natural milieu and social milieu. That
is why the national strategy demands an integration and a harmonization of actions.
In sum, it is important to recall that desertification control and natural
resources management are not sectorial but must take into account the social,
economic and ecological development conditions. Desertification control and the
natural resources management must also be foreseen from the angle of poverty
control.
• A coherence of interventions and a cohesion among stakeholders
The review of LCD/GRN institutional framework reveals a diversity of
institutions and a multitude stakeholders of actors and their approaches. This
situation, characterized by the duplication and the skill conflicts, provoke
coordination problems and coherence of interventions to provide appropriate
solutions. Besides, the implementation of PAN/LCD-GRN will seek for conventions
synergy from the Rio de Janeiro summit.
• An intervention according to the “ Villages management approach”
Primarily, LCD-GRN is executed at the local level and through local
development programs, the “villages management approach” which perfectly suits
with the CCD demands, will be the backbone of the Combating because of its
integrated, participatory and decentralized nature.
• An involvement and an active participation of populations particularly
women and youth, through effective decentralized structures
The same management of resources and space demands the full and total
participation of populations. These ones will be associated, through organized
structures, at all stages of the diagnostic, planning/programming, implementation and
follow up evaluation of interventions. This association will be done at all levels and
will emphasize, particularly on the choice of technology, the modalities of
implementation, funding and self management of the achievements. A natural

--- Page 31 ---
31
understanding of CCD challenges by all stakeholders, particularly, the population, is
the evidence of their implication/participation. For that, the national strategy will put a
particular emphasis on information, sensitization and communication as well as the
taking into account of traditional knowledge and know-how.
• A strengthened partnership among stakeholders
The taking into account of combating desertification and natural resources
management impose a share of powers and responsibilities, and a definition of roles
among all stakeholders, namely the population and the civil society. Thus, the
PAN/LCD-GRN will put forward the search for a reinforcement of partnership through
a permanent dialogue among all stakeholders involved at all levels, namely: the state
(through its various services and agencies), the local communities, the civil society,
the NGOs, the traditional chiefs, the beneficiary populations and the donors agencies
with the view of a clear distribution of their roles. All along stakeholders will be
permanent carried out.
• A consideration of achievements
Niger has got experiences in LCD, it is suitable to capitalize these
achievements and bear them in mind in the elaboration of future sub-programs and
projects.
• Long term vision
Despite the urgency that the situation demands in certain regions and the need
to respond more rapidly as possible to certain important imbalances, the national
strategy requires a medium and long term perspective analysis of problems and
solutions.
• A harmonious distribution of actions
In order to avoid a sprinkling of funding and ensure a better impact of actions
to be carried out, there should be a sustained fund research and raising policy f
concerned stakeholders as well as, harmonious and balanced allocution of these
funds bearing in mind priority zones vis à vis preserving the production capital.
b) The strategic axes
There elements of reference, distributed in priority zones in relation with
desertification and drought factors are taken into account. They are: the natural
resources management, the follow up of climatic hazards and constraints related to
national resources management and the support to LCD/GRN.
III.2.1. National Resources Management
III.2.1.1. Lands
a) Exploitation method

--- Page 32 ---
32
This section will mainly deal with lands degradation due to human activities which are
mainly agriculture and breeding
About agriculture, the dominant production systems are rainy season farming
and if need be the irrigated farming. The first ones met essentially under the Isohyet
300 mm (map III.1 in annex) and are unfortunately in costly extensive. They are:
(cid:3) To extensive agricultural and breeding production;
(cid:3) The agricultural and breeding production system on the way of
intensification, characterized by a beginning of inputs and truck farming use,
in which women play n important role in the production (leguminous plants,
market gardering);
(cid:3) The irrigated production system which comprises on the one hand
the agricultural production system in way of intensification under traditional
irrigation, and on the other hand the intensive agricultural production system
with total water control at the level of hydro-agricultural developments. This
system often leads to lands fertility loss due to hydrous erosion, to silting up
and alkalization.
(cid:3) The oasis production system in the Northern and the Eastern part of
the country but facing exploitations silting up and products outlets problems.
It is said that, all these agricultural production systems, except those form irrigation
and oases, are mainly based on millet and sorghum crop combined with leguminous
plans (beans peanuts) and have a common feature, namely the insufficiency of their
productivity. This poor performance is by in large due to the reduction of soils fertility,
the use of rudimentary agricultural input, the reduction of mulching, the low adoption
of improved seeds, parasites pressure, insufficient technical training of the rural
sector, among others. About specific cases of extensive systems and those ongoing
intensification, according to the situation, we notice a dominance of vegetal or animal
productions.
Breeding represents 12 to 16% of the GDP depending on years and
constitutes the second source of export after wanium. The bad beading of the herds
constitute an important factor of lands-degradation. It is practiced through production
system which the most important are:
(cid:3) The production system typically pastoral and extension in the zones
recording less than 300 mm of annual rainfall, with fodder potentials but
affected by the droughts;
(cid:3) The agro-sylvo-pastoral production;
(cid:3) The urban and suburban production system whose main constraints is the
well-know insufficiency of appropriate pasture zone and animals wandering;
(cid:3) The specialized production system made up of the breeding on irrigated
perimeters and that of ranching type.
The animal production through these various systems knows today constraints
of food nature (poorness of the pastures, invasive plants and the low fodder crops
production), sanitary (parasitism) and the perpetuation of certain practices
(capitalization by increasing the numbers) and the perpetuation of certain practices
(capitalization by increasing the numbers). In conclusion, agriculture and breeding, as

--- Page 33 ---
33
sub component of the land reform, are complementary (fodder, fertility and energy)
but way often in competition for the space exploitation (farming lands extension and
subsequent conflicts between and breeders).
b) General Objective
The general objective is to ensure a sustainable management of lands in the
areas. In order to achieve thise main objective, strategic orientations and possible
identified actions are presented in the table below:
Strategic Orientations Possible Actions
1. Adopt an participatory approach of the 1.1 Information, sensitization and
areas development populations training
1.2 Completion of the regulatory
framework, popularization and
application of juridical texts for
grassroots organizations (law on
the co-operatives status, law on
juridical regime and of natural
resources management local
structures, etc...)
2. Proceed to the transfer of decision 2.1 Support to the emergence and/or the
powers to grassroots communities grassroots organizations consolidation
‘decentralization) and make effective namely specific organizations of
their sense of responsibility producers;
2.2 Acceleration of decentralization
implementation;
2.3 Incitement to transparent relationships
establishment freely negotiated
between technical, administrative
powers and the grassroots
organizations
(contract/Protocol/convention, etc.)
3.Restore and preserve the productive 3.1 Rehabilitation of degraded lands
capital by conserving the ecosystems
productive character and
combating basins salinity;
3.2 Popularization of silting up control
techniques and the lands fertility
management;
3.3 Promotion of phosphate-enriched;

--- Page 34 ---
34
3.4 Elaboration and implementation of
clearing front stabilization plans;
3.5 Setting up windbreaks and the
recourse to CES/DRS actions;
3.6 Control of silting up of cultures, oasis,
basins and the elaboration and
implementation of palm-groves
management plan;
3.7 Conservation techniques development
and/or agricultural products
transformation;
3.8 Valorization of organic manuring;
4. Improve agricultural and breeding 4.1. Promotion and popularization of
practices endogenous technologies, valorization of
local knowledge;
4.2. Strengthening of intervention
technical services in rural area in human
resources, natural and technological
means;
4.3. Agricultural an breeding products
diversification and intensification;
4.4 Agriculture and forestry promotion;
4.5. promotion of research-development-
training agencies
4.6. Promotion of technological
exchanges through South-South and/or
North-South cooperation.
4.7. Assessment of potential impacts
agricultural production systems on land
deterioration;
4.8. Development of high output crops
and adapted to specific agricultural and
ecological zones
4.9. Improvement of breeding system by
emphasizing on green cover protection
and restoration aspects;

--- Page 35 ---
35
4.10. Consideration of seasonal forecast
in planing agricultural activities;
4.11. promotion of agriculture/breeding
integration;
4.12. Promotion of private irrigation
system;
4.13. Mobilization and saving of surface
water in order to value lands;
5. Specialize regions in agricultural, 5.1. Elaboration of potentials and
forestry and breeding productions in constraints map for the various types of
respecting lands vocations. activities in the regions;
5.2. Elaboration of agricultural and
breeding productions specialization
programs;
5.3. Promotion of exchanges among
regions
6.Realize support infrastructures for 6.1. Realization of tracks services in
agricultural forestry and breeding order to open up production zones;
production
6.2. Building and/or rehabilitation of
products and conservation,
stocking and transformation
facilities;
6.3. Improvement of penning into
breeding water points
7. Promote a land security and 7.1. application of developed land policy
institutional and legal framework in the rural code orientation principles;
favorable to the development of
agricultural, forestry and breeding 7.2. popularization of the rural code,
activities
7.3. Creation and funding of lands
commissions,
7.4. Delimitation of pastures areas and
corridors.
8.strengthen agricultural forestry and 8.1. Efficient mobilization of the national
breeding research. system of research
8.2. Promotion of research/development

--- Page 36 ---
36
in order to improve system productivity
8.3 Identification of causes and solutions
to the problem of the adoption of
technologies and new varieties adapted
(new varieties mechanization various
fertilizers know how, etc.;
8.4. Inventory and diffusion of the farmers
savoir-faire, the appropriate innovations
and technologies transfer;
9. Strengthen actor’s capacities in 9.1 setting up of appropriate
information, Education Communication mechanisms of the activities funding;
(IEC) consulting assistance, loans, supply
and marketing 9.2. Creation of appropriate mechanisms
activity funding;
9.3. Assistance to supportative actions
upstream (inputs) and downstream
(transformation and marketing)
production systems ;
III.2.1.2.Vegetal and wildlife resources.
a) Exploitation mod
The vegetal resources condition is particularly worrying in Niger. In fact,
resources were severely affected, these last decades, by a generalized degradation
process mainly attributable to climatic and anthropogenic factors. One of the main
causes of deforestation is on the one hand agricultural outputs decrease resulting in
the expansion of clearings and population moves towards the south, in protected and
classified forest areas, and on the other hand, an important population growth. To
that adds, the water table decrease due to an overexploitation and/or the frequent
rainfall deficit. As consequence, the transformation of some forest ecosystems
following the progressive disappearance of pioneering species in favor of more rustic
species as Acacias. The forest spaces are also perceived by rural populations as
breeding spaces and reserved lands spaces for agriculture. Wood trade showed
among others, the economic interest of ligneous formations this explains their over
exploitation. These formations would diminish every year by more than 100.000 ha,
under the combined effects of uncontrolled cutting down, bush fires, overgrazing,
cultures expansion and climatic regression. Ligneous resources constitute the main
energy source of the country (90% of the national energy needs). In addition, it
constitutes a at least food complement for the population, products for traditional
pharmacopoeia and also supply the essential of wood services. Contributing for
more than 25% in fodder needs, vegetal resources play an important role in
breeding. Therefore breeding activity constitutes the main degradation factors of
green cover.
As far as wildlife is concerned, Niger is among the fee countries of the sub-
region having approached the international norm in classify their space into protected

--- Page 37 ---
37
areas (11%). National policies implemented in wildlife and in developing hunting
spaces, consisted essentially in the protection of some wildlife species, in classifying
in the form or reserves the resources of some portions of the territory (6.1%),and in
the effective ban of hunting from 1972 to 1996.
Despite the legislative and statutory measures, the practical exploitation of
resource, characterized essentially by illegal withdrawals and the destruction of the
best habitats (bush fire, strong breeding pressure and agricultural encroachments)
continue one of the main causes of the national wildlife production potential decline.
However, despite these practices combined with drought effects, there is hope as far
as the reconstitution of sizes and the taking into account of wildlife are concerned
(case of last specimens of giraffes in west Africa) as an economic activity which could
contribute significantly to the national economy.
b) General objective
The general objective is to ensure a sustainable management of vegetal and
wildlife resources, through the organization and effective participation of the
populations. From this objective come out strategic orientations and possible actions
presented in the table below.
Strategic orientations Possible actions
1. adopt a participatory approach 1.1 Information, sensitization and training of
for land development populations
1.2. regular reforesting courses to development
technical senior staff
1.3. Completing of the statutory and population
framework of legal texts grassroots organization
(law on cooperative status, law related to legal
regime of local agencies of natural resource’
management, etc.)
2.Proceed to the transfer of 2.1. Adoption of adequate regulations on the
decision making powers to transfer of decision making power;
grassroot communities and make
effective their sense of 2.2. Promotion of the emergence and/or
responsibility (decentralization) reinforcement of grassroots organization,
especially producers’ organization
2.3. Incitement of the establishment of
transparent relationships freely
negotiated between technical
administrations powers and grassroot
organizations (contracts/protocol
/convention, etc.)
3. Promote associations 3.1 Establishment and/or strengthening of

--- Page 38 ---
38
(GIE,NGO, cooperatives, OCB, training agencies and advice to grassroot
etc.) and strengthen their organizations
capacities.
3.2. Negotiation capacity of peasant
organizations;
3.3. Increase of material, financial, human and
organizational capacities of state, NGO,
Associations and Institutions;
4. Ensure land security to 4.1.Application of the development in the
producers and equal access of orientation principles of the rural code;
women to vegetal resources,
ensure a sustainable management 4.2. Popularization of the rural code
of these resources
4.3. Creation and funding of land commissions;
5.Create conditions for a better 5.1. Information, sensitization and education
participation of populations and of populations on the strategic
private sector on the management importance of vegetal and wildlife
of vegetal and wildlife resources. resources;
5.2. Institutionalizing of a national LCD week;
5.2. Responsibilizing the population in the
management of forest and wildlife
resources and the desertification control;
5.4. Designing and/or adoption, disseminating
and applying of appropriate legislative and
regulatory texts (in collaboration with
populations);
5.5. Encouraging and enhancing the value of
traditional practices promoting a good natural
resources management and generally all
efficient initiatives (tree nursery, private forest,
ranching) capable of contributing to productive
potentials preservation and improvement;
5.6. Encouraging partnership with populations in
the implementation of strategies;
5.7. Facilitating of procedures of access trough
means necessary for investment;
5.8 Rationalizing resources exploitation which
takes into account populations interests;
5.9. Generalizing the design and implementation

--- Page 39 ---
39
of supply master plans in wood energy wildlife,
forest and fisheries development plans ;
5.10. consideration of local knowledge in the
design and implementation of
research/development programs.
6.Improve the knowledge of the 6.1. Updating the inventory of green and wildlife
productive potential and promote resources;
sustainable developments of
vegetal wildlife resources 6.2. Strengthening and harmonization of
information system on natural resources (SIRN);
6.3. Promoting research on identification,
valorization and preservation of biological
materials having a clear socio-economic and
ecological interests.;
6.4. Consideration of supportive activities that
can generate incomes in rural area in
implementing projects;
6.5. Development of fodder plants and food
supplement;
6.6. development of agrostological research by
creating a monitoring system of pastures;
6.7. Creation of an adequate penning of water
points and their systematic reforestation;
6.8. Generalization of land development plans
by focussing on population sense of
responsibility;
6.9. Control of the livestock size and
consideration of the grazing capacity;
6.10 Knowledge of livestock size and routes
charge capacity;
6.11. Zootechnical performances improvement
of bovine, camel races etc.;
6.12. Livestock marketing development
7. Reconstitute ecosystems 7.1. Allocution of some financial resources
favorable to wildlife and flora generated from the promotion of genetic tourism
diversity and vision, in favor wildlife and its rabitat;

--- Page 40 ---
40
7.2. Designing plans of wildlife species
management and taxonomic exploited groups;
8. Increase the existing resource 8.1. Development of mass reforestation, village
capital forestry and of natural regeneration and the
creation of arboreta;
8.2. Development of wildlife breeding;
8.3. Popularization of improved clearing
technique
9.Alleviate pressure on ligneous 9.1. Development of building
resources
9.2. Development of the use of improved hearth
;
9.3. Development of the use of firewood
substitutes for rural populations;
9.4. Development of forests (rural markets)
C) Hydrous and fish resources and their exploitation methods
C.1. Exploitation methods
Though the country has important water potentials, this resource appears as a
limitating factor because of its insufficient exploitation. Thus is the basic problem of
water in Niger is laid in term of control of this resource. Nevertheless, it constitutes
the main lever in land development. This is the reason that Water Development
Program, one of the six (6) priority programs of the PNEDD has been designed.
Regarding fish exploitation, it is essentially traditional and seasonal. Numerous
water plans have an important fish potential but they are often under exploited and
faced with a high evaporation, a gradual silting, an overrunning by water plants such
as water hyacinth (Echornia crassipes), pistia stratoites nymphea sp and anarchic
occupation of the banks. For most of them, they are not under any management
method. The fish exploitation is often limited by accessibility difficulty and the
remoteness of consumption centers. Also, the improper utilization of machines not
much selective and often destructive is widely developed making thus difficult the
renewable of the stock.
The last ichtyobiological studies carried out on the Niger part of the River
Niger in 1962, 1971 and 1987 enabled to notice during inventories the persistence of
species diversity with a decrease in their abundance. This similarity makes us believe
that drought conditions do not make some species disappear although several of
them have become rare in their captures. Fishing products are partly reliant on
seasonal floods of alluvial plains for fish stocking and reproduction which can be
jeopardized by the discharge modification or hydro-agricultural lands development
C.2. General Objective

--- Page 41 ---
41
The general objective is to enhance the value of hydrous resources in view to
encourage fish conservation and the development fishing activities. To reach these
objectives strategic orientation and selected possible actions are presented in the
table below:
Strategic orientations Possible actions
1. Maintain and enhance the 1.1. Development of watersheds aiming at
productive capital reducing silting of water plans and allow
infiltration;
1.2. Development of irrigation lands allotted
to local communities by means of rural
concessions;
1.3. Monitoring capacities development of
ground waters, surface water, evolution
of lands under irrigation and potential
impact on environment, present and
future public and private investments in
the area of irrigation;
1.4. Establishment of water retentions at the
level of favorable sites (bridge;
watersheds, etc.) in view developing
fish agricultural and pastoral
production;
1.5. Taking into account fish breeding
activity in flooded developed areas ;
1.6. Elaboration and/or adoption of
dissemination of appropriated legislative
and regulatory texts (in collaboration
with the populations);
2.1. Information sensitization and training
2. Enhance fish productions Producers;
2.2. Development of conservation,
transformation and marketing techniques of
fish.
d) MINERAL RESOURCES AND THEIR EXPLOITATION METHODS
d-1 Exploitation Methods

--- Page 42 ---
42
Deposits characteristics (geographic localization, size, content) exploitation method
(open cut mine, underground mine ), minerals recovery techniques, evacuation of
spoils and activities related to exploitations as well as the development of towns
around mines are responsible for the degradation of environment and desertification .
However, some mining resources are source of energy (mineral coal, uranium,
petroleum). Regarding mineral coal, the positive conclusion of the impact
assessment on the utilization of mineral coal for domestic use enabled the
construction of a pilot carbonization unit on Sonichar site in Tchirozérine and the
conduct of a marketing test project in urban zones in the North .
In the industrial area, wastes contribute to desertification phenomenon through
lands and vegetal cover degradation. It is the case of plastic phenomenon, ground
waters pollution, transmission of sterilizing dust and gas with greenhouse effects.
d.2 General Objective.
The general objective is to promote a mining and industrial exploitation respectful of
the environment by minimizing the risks of pollution and land degradation. That is
why strategic orientations and possible defined actions are presented in the table
below.
Strategic Orientations Possible Actions
1. Promote mining energy sources 1.1. Exploitation of mining resources, sources of
exploitation and fertilizers; substitution energy ( mineral coal,
petroleum,.....) and source of fertilizers;
2.1 Application of the blueprint law on environment
2. Promote environmental impact and the law instituting the impact assessment and
assessment of mining and industrial their implementation respect;
exploitations and see to their
application; 2.2. Institution of an environmental supervision in
mining and quarry exploitation zones
2.3. Application of texts relating to mines and
quarries exploitation;
3.1 Development of mining exploitation respectful
of the environment;
3. Promote resources exploitation 3.2 Safeguard and restoration of degraded
technologies respectful of ecosystems around mines and quarries;
environment
3.3 Prevention and safeguard of water and air
quality any mining and quarry exploitation

--- Page 43 ---
43
3.2.2 Combating hazards and constraints relating to the natural
resources management
a) Climatic phenomena and drought.
It is obvious today that climatic changes and desertification are intimately. In
fact, during the last 30 years, the observed rainfall from 20 to 40% in Niger
encourage drought and desertification through lands degradation processes. The first
interaction type is that with hydrous deficit, energy which help to evaporate water is
used for the warning of surrounding air possible evaporation and perspiration
potential and consequently, the reduction of the cloudy cover and lands desiccation.
The second interaction type between the two phenomena is the vegetal cover
disappearance because of desertification, that which has as a consequence the
disappearance of absorption wells greenhouse effects gases and therefore the
warming increase. This reduction of the vegetal cover will also increase the quantity
of reflected energy towards the atmosphere, increasing thus the albedo.
The wind erosion is unquestionably the most important phenomenon of
environment degradation by its extent and effects as well in Niger as and in the
Sahelian zone in its whole. The long dry season and the processes described
previously create the more favorable conditions for this type of erosion. The most
important soil losses are recorded during tornadoes liked to stormy grains. The most
recent data give an average last of 10 ha at the passage of a grains lines resulting in
a net fertility loss of the first 10 centimeters estimated at 3% (STERK, 1997).
The most disturbing aspect of wind erosion in Niger is its interaction with the
climate through what is now called local mechanism of retroaction. In fact, we notice
that on the last 75 years, rainfall varies in reverse sense of atmosphere charge in
wind erosion dust (ICARDA 1998). This phenomenon also observed in other
countries of the Sahelian zone, lets thing of a mechanism of self maintenance of
drought initiated always at the beginning by general circulation anomalies.
At last, we must signal in relation with degradation process, that rains, besides
their beneficial effects, have also harmful effects. The diffused streaming on the
plateaus and slopes, carry away fine elements and end in formation of glacis
sterilizing important surfaces. Concentrated streaming due to violent rains develops
for its part, regressive erosion which can locally be important. We estimate at 3.8
tons/ha the average quantity of land taken away by tornado (IFAN, 1997).
Eventually, these various phenomena also contribute to limit water infiltration , and
therefore limit hydrous reserves for the plants and this, in addition, reduces surfaces
of lands suitable for cultivation.
In conclusion, degradation process complexity is such as a large number of
causes and effects are retroactively linked. That which a priori does not enable to
find simple solutions, the key variables which are: demography rainfall deficit, the
mechanical effect of rains, wind and poverty. If none of these parameters, can be
effectively controlled, then there are risks to reach impasses: the soils degradation,
the reduction of agricultural and breeding production, widening of food deficit, etc.
General Objective

--- Page 44 ---
44
The general objective is to analyze, follow and reduce the factors contributing
to desertification and drought.. To reach these objectives, the defined strategic
orientations and actions are presented in the table below:
Strategic Orientations Possible Actions
1. To know better the factors 1.1. Completion of the environmental
which contribute to drought and diagnostic assessment (ex: realize the
lands degradation; diagnostic assessment of natural
resources (UTA/DE-PGRN);
1.2. Setting up of a system of follow up on
Environment (information system on
Environment)
2.Understand the mechanism at the 2.1 Quantification of lands degradation
heart of drought persistence, the phenomenon;
aggravation of desertification
phenomenon. 2.2.Forecast of lands degradation risks and
their taking into account in development
projects designing.
3.To identify and adopt follow up 3.1. Strengthen climatological, meteorological
indicators relating to climate, and hydrologic national follow up capacities
drought and lands degradation
3.2. Definition and the use of drought and
desertification follow up indicators;
4.To adopt and reduce strategy of 4.1. Reinforcement of local population
winds, rains and drought erosive effective participation in the designing,
effects; planning, implementation, follow up and
evaluation of hydrous and wind erosion control
actions;
4.2. Creation and /or strengthening of
CES/DRSpopularization techniques structures;
4.3. Training and information of the decision
makers, populations (namely women, young
people), NGOs, as well as development agents
on the importance and consequences,
especially long-term, of desertification
phenomenon;
4.4. Elaboration and implementation of projects
aiming at promoting new means of subsistence
in drought situations;
4.5 Promotion of local practices of drought
reduction.

--- Page 45 ---
45
b) Population and Habitat
The rhythm of population growth in Niger tends to accelerate because of the
high birth rate (52.3% in 1999). Similarly, the economic growth hardly goes beyond
1.5%.Before this situation, with the support of external partners, the government has
set up from 1992 a national population policy essentially based on family planning.
Despite this policy, the rate of increase always remains high. This mitigated result is
explained partly by the socio-cultural and illiteracy gravity
Rural in its majority, this population tempts to combat drought and desertification
effects by developing survival strategies through intra-regional, inter-regional (from
North to south), and transboundary migrations (Diffa and Tahoua regions cases), the
production systems diversification (anti-risks systems), the livestock, land and natural
resources decapitalization (wood and straw commercial exploitation).
Despite its predominant role in demographic dynamic of some regions,
migration, whose extent is unrecognized, constitutes in other respects an important
factor of populations concentration in the southern zone in the south to of the 16th
parallel on about on quarter of the total surface area of the country.
The main link between habitat and the environment reside in the fact that the
buildings use ligneous resources and villages expansion has a direct impact on
natural environment. That is why vegetal resources (palm trees..) used as materials
in traditional habitat buildings, are in constant regression for some years under the
combined effect of climatic hazards and anthropogenic factors. The most hardy
species, which were formerly the most utilized, become locally more and more
scarce.
The degradation of the environment therefore has negative incidences on
habitat and man’s conditions of life. But, it is specially the most destitute who suffer
more of this firewood shortage and paradoxically it is they who use service wood the
most (wood of lower quality leading to a more frequent renewal).
However, to explain the environment degradation only by the population
growth and the necessity to feed it would be an incomplete diagnostic, because a
population which is well informed, sensitized, educated and which is given a sense of
responsibility, constitutes the engine of desertification control and of a sustainable
management of the national resources.
General objectives
The general objective is to see the dynamic of populations in relation with
space occupation, to organize them and make participate in the sustainable
management of the national resources, in the sense of a good land security, the
improvement of their activities profitability and that of their conditions of life. This
objective may be supported by strategic orientations and possible actions in defined
the table below:

--- Page 46 ---
46
Strategic Orientations Possible Actions
1. Improve the perception of the 1.1. Sensitization and information of the rural
economic character of the communities on all LCD-GRN aspects;
natural resources of the
grassroots communities.
1.2. Development of the rural
entrepreneurship
1.3. Valorization of the national resources as
a source of income
2.Improve the population conditions 2.1 Establishment and/or development of
of life income generating activities (handicraft units,
fattening etc.)
2.2. Setting up of mechanisms of financial
resources mobilization for rural communities;
2.3. Strengthening of the capacities of rural
community support service;
2.4. Encouragement of technology
exchanges at national and sub-regional
levels through south-south cooperation
2.5. Discouragement of the plastic bags
imports by high taxes to importation;
2.6. Establishment, protection and
management of green spaces and reserved
spaces to social equipment;
2.7. Creation of leisure parks and botanical
gardens;
2.8. Creation of modern water points.
2.9. Sensitization, information and training of
the rural communities on hygiene and the
sanitation.
3.Adapt population and habitat 3.1. Large scale popularization of techniques of
policies to resources availability building without wood;

--- Page 47 ---
47
3.2. Valorization of the traditional techniques
regarding family planning;
4. Improve women conditions of 4.1. Alleviation domestic works (grain mill,
work water exhaustion means)
4.2. Establishment of multi-purpose community
and private woods at village level;
5. Empower the populations in the 5.1. Finalization, popularization and
socio-economic development implementation of rural code application texts;
process
5.2. Generalization of the land commissions;
5.3. Organization and training of women and
young people to LCD works;
5.4. Powers and technologies transfer to
populations and particularly women and young
people..
III.2.3. Support mechanisms to desertification control and sustainable
management of natural resources
III.2.3.1. Education and Sciences
In Niger, training activities in the framework of desertification control are
essentially provided in favor of the following target groups: rural communities,
development agents and students.
At rural communities’ level, the training practices for rural development have
been very heterogeneous during the three last decades. Important differences exist
within the country, even within a region where often coexist very various and less
articulated among themselves educational and informal training actions.
Training which as practiced in the 60’s in the form of rural animation evolved
later towards mass literacy before resulting functional with the emergence of
projects. Rural communities’ training constraints are of several types:
(cid:3) only a tiny part of the rural population mostly illiterate (80%) is
affected and mainly through projects; in fact, there is an in
inadequacy between recruitment policy and supervision needs the
field;
(cid:3) this training does not sufficiently take into account social and cultural
environment of the populations; in addition, it does not live up to the population
expectations.
The supervision agents are trained in public schools namely IPDR of KOLLO,
CFCA and EMAIR for technicians, Faculty of Agronomy, CRESA and other schools
abroad for the senior staff.

--- Page 48 ---
48
The main features of this training encounters the following:
(cid:1) Insufficient number of training centers and their reception capacities,
(cid:1) inadequacy of rural world realities integration in the syllabi ,
(cid:1) ignorance of local know-how and farmers’ traditions, (lack of control of
farmers practices and national languages)
(cid:1) shortage of trainers and supervision agents,
(cid:1) oriented training,
(cid:1) shortage of material and financial means
At the level of students, to Environmental Education (EE) has long been
included in the strategies of desertification control and natural resources
management, through region cooperation animated and coordinated by CILSS. This
education aims the following general objectives:
(cid:1) To improve the quality and effectiveness of actors addressing
environmental issues,
(cid:1) To enhance the local capacities of natural resources management in the
sahel of which the first step is the Sahelian Syllabus for Environmental
Education (PSE) whose specific objective is to bring educated sahelian
children to adopt a respectful attitude.
Two components of PSE are currently implemented in Niger
* the training/information program on environment (PFIE)
*the sahelian education program on environment for secondary
schools (PSE2) .
These two components of PSE do not cover all the schools in the country. In
fact, environmental education is at a piloting stage and does affect only a handful of
school children. Thus, the environmental dimension is insufficiently taken into
account despite the scope of environmental problems. However, in the regions of
Zinder and Diffa the implementation of an environmental education program funded
by IUCN and which interests on only the formal and informal school milieu but also
the non academic milieu.
In the area of research, desertification control and natural resources
management activities concern both basic research and applied research. Applied
research, conducted generally at the request of development support structures, is
characterized by the insufficient consideration of farmers’ practices and know-how
though socially and economically justified.
The consequence of this situation is the low interest shown by producers
regarding research findings and the extended technologies. Though, all farmers
production practices fit in explicit logic and management strategies of basic
production to reduce hazards, they are today considered not much productive, or
even environment degradation factors.
Basic research is characterized by the insufficient dissemination of its findings
due to lack of means earmarked for this purpose. Thus, the collected stored data
remain not much exploited by users. The two categories of research are confronted
today to problems of human and financial resources mobilization, insufficiency of
adequate equipment. Besides, the existing skills are insufficient with regard to the

--- Page 49 ---
49
necessary research scope for a better increase of agricultural and breeding
productivity. To that there is a lack of synergies among research institutions that
entails results too much sectoriel for the treatment of the rural world global problems.
Presently there is no coordination structure of research activities that whose
consequence is the repetition in some cases of topics treatment.
Research funding suffer in general from difficulties linked to extension
provision and their adoption mainly because of:
The lack of political commitment which results in the insufficiency or even lack
of financial means.
(cid:1) inappropriateness tation of technologies to socio-economic ad cultural
realities of
producers (major difficulty), hence populations reluctance to adopt
certain technologies,
(cid:1) insufficient number and low level competence of grassroots
extension provision agents.
However, despite all these constraints, some achievements have been
recorded. It is mainly the case with the forms whose dissemination gave satisfactory
results in their application area (index of approaches and experiences regarding-
PRSAA, January 1998).
Aim
The aim is to enhance the capacities of actors in desertification control and
natural resources management through the development of existing local know-how
and viabilization of educational, training and information structures in order to reach
this objective strategic orientations and possible actions are presented this objective
strategic orientations and possible actions are presented in the table below:
Strategic Orientations Possible Actions
1. To strengthen operational the 1.1 Establishment of a synergy between
links between research and researchers and development senior
development agents (for example Early warning system
(SAP) and organizations in charge of
meteorological and weather forecast;
1.2 Motivating the department in charge of
research-extension and the participation of
development of senior staff in the definition
of research areas and the follow-up of their
implementations
1.3 Development of the dissemination of
information and exchange of experiences at
will levels
2.1. Adults sensitization, information and training
2. To promote new behaviors through the use of appropriate tools (schools,

--- Page 50 ---
50
favorable to DS/NRM/SDM; literacy centers media and permanent education
centers)
2.2. Promotion of the piloting of innovations and
their integration into the formal educational
system;
2.3. Allocution of necessary means to the
educational and research systems;
2.4. promotion of teacher training at all levels
2.5. Development of staff training in sufficient
number and in quality to assure a better
coverage of the national territory on the one
hand and support the development of self-
training on the other as well as the in-
service training of these staff.;
2.6. Enhancement of access to IPDR for the
private sector
2.7. Encouraging the establishment of public
and private training centers and reception
capacities building of the existing centers;
2.8. Setting up of a coordination and monitoring
mechanism in the area environmental
education (EE);
2.9. Developing and encouraging after impact
assessment, the utilization of agricultural
material;
2.10. Encouraging private initiatives in the area
of DC/NRM;
2.11. Capitalization and valorization of
experiences of projects and other
stakeholders in environmental education
2.12. Development of the use of national
languages and Elaboration of didactic
documents;
2.13. Rehabilitation and generalization of CFCA,
CPR and CPT etc.;
3.1 Development of an efficient partnership
and capacities building in the area of
national, sub-regional and regional

--- Page 51 ---
51
research;
3. To promote the development
of applied research in 3.2. Encouraging and extension provision for
CD/NRM/SDM; applied research on ecology and
management of milieu,
3.3. Encourage and promoting research on
physical milieu (in particular soil and at
misfire
3.4. Pursuing and intensifying research works
regarding combating resources enemies in the
area of agriculture, animal breeding forestry and
fish breeding;
3.5. Inventorying collection and analysis of data
related to specific composition and general
behaviors of species,
3.6. Betterment of the understanding of
agricultural system and farmers’ strategies
in the area of DC/NRM;
3.7. Gathering understanding of the plant and
animal compositions, the evolution of their
numbers and the health hazards facing the
animals in the national game parks
3.8. Follow-up and updating of agrosystems
characteristics;
3.9. Maintenance, conservation and
improvement through the most appropriate
ways and means of genetic resources and
bio-diversity,
3.10. Designing and proposing productions
intensification models that are natural
resources-friendly .
4.1. Integration of the local environmental and
know-how dimensions in all training programs at
all level:
4. To promote improve and enhance 4.2. Inventory taking, selection and dissemination
local technologies and know-how of local practices strategies and know-how
regarding agriculture, breeding, forestry and fish
breeding.

--- Page 52 ---
52
III.2.3.2. Monitoring, warning and drought effects reduction systems
Niger has experienced during this century natural disasters of which the most
significant ones are:
(cid:3) famines of the 1931s, 1953-1955s, 1966-1969s, 1973/74s, 1983/84s,
1997/98s
(cid:3) epidemics of bovine plagues, smallpox, cholera, meningitis;
(cid:3) locust invasions (1928-1931), (1974-1975) and bush fires;
(cid:3) floods following abundant precipitation (1936-1946, 1952, 1998).
(cid:3) predators and diseases which affect crops and vegetation,
All these well as calamities entailed important losses identified in natural
resources as in human and animal lives. The poor implementation of identified
policies, orientations and actions reveal the weakness of the monitoring systems and
follow up of the desertification phenomenon, the effects of drought and in general, of
other environmental problems. This situation proves the necessity to have adequate
systems of monitoring, prevention and reduction of drought effects. To that effect an
agrohydrometeorological follow up is carried out every decade. It is piloted by a pluri-
disciplinary taskforce made up of the permanent secretariat of the early warning
system (SAP), the national department meteorology, of agriculture, breeding and
animal product based industry and the department of water resources, with the
participation of the gendarmerie national, special military Unit the Ministry of Interior
and with the collaboration of AGRHYMET. This system consists in continuous watch
of large areas which are not always beastly accessible with in mind the aims of
assessment desertification evolution or efforts to alleviate desertification. Yet, the
monitoring evaluation activities of desertification control and drought effects
alleviation have not provided the expected results.
The bio-geophysical indicators among which; water erosion wind erosion,
vegetal cover degradation, human settlements have not been appropriately followed
up.
The Early warning system being a set of seasonal information, on natural
resources and agricultural productions, is foremost the aimed at, people’s food
security and disaster prevention and management.
From the 1960s, the following disaster early warning and management have
been established following the 1984 droughts
- The Multidiscipline technical committee on food Aid Monitoring and
coordination
- The permanent early warning system (EWS) and disaster Management.
Another of early warning set up in Niger, is the forecast of critical discharges of
river Niger at Niamey for which an annual technical note at low water level period is
produced. Unfortunately, this forecast is carried out only on the river Niger and not on
the hydrological network as a whole.
Besides the follow up of rain parameter is fundamental for early warning. Ii is
in order to mention the weakness of the observation network in Niger as a limiting
factor.
The existing national committee in charge of the early warning system and
disaster management (SAP-GC) has been mandated, to propose to government:

--- Page 53 ---
53
(cid:3) suitable measures to eliminate or reduce the instability effects of natural and
socio-economic environment;
(cid:3) punctual activities and development activities
(cid:3) necessary measures to detect structural or crisis situation and find a remedy
to them, follow up their implementation and assess their impact.
I is an established today fact is that the SAP has focussed essentially it its
activities on food assistance etc.) to especially specially to remedy cereal deficits of
agricultural campaigns. This is why appropriate measures are not timely taken to
address food shortage situations. From what precedes it transpire that the SAP is
reduced to a more curative function than preventive.
Aim
The aim is to set up an adequate system of disaster monitoring and have a
mechanism for natural catastrophes effects reduction. To reach this objective,
strategic orientations and possible actions defined in the table below are presented.
Strategic Orientations Possible Actions
1. To enhance the capacities of 1.1 Enhance of the national monitoring
the national network of network and establishment of a pertinent
monitoring, follow-up and early database in the area of desertification
warning regarding the monitoring and follow-up.;
desertification and draught
phenomena 1.2 Development of practical modalities for
desertification monitoring along well
identified transport and at the level of
pilot sites.
1.3 Use of remote sensing in view of
assessing the degradation of the
environment;
1.4 Systematic monitoring for a better
design of erosion control program;
1.5 Rehabilitation and up grading of the
national hydrometry network;
1.6 Enhancement of scientific capacities
for a multiscale modeling of land
occupancy;
1.7 Enhancement of the existing early
warning system mainly through the
integration of components relating to
drought forecast and monitoring;
1.8 Development synergies between sub-
regional and international institutions

--- Page 54 ---
54
working in the area of DC on the one
hand and their counterparts at national
levels, on the other hand;
2. To promote an appropriate and 2.1. Design and establishment of an
efficient system to monitoring information system on desertification
and assess the activities with the assistance of partners (UNEP,
relating to desertification OSS etc.);
control, natural resources
management and drought 2.2. Design of a national system to assess
effects alleviation and monitor desertification on the basis of
relevant physical, biological, socio-economic
and cultural indicators;
III.3.PAN-LCD/GRN priority sub-programs
The analysis of desertification and natural resources degradation factors and
of priority intervention axes related to the action plan enables to identify 5 priority
sub-programs; they are:
a) In the area of sustainable management of natural resources:
Sub-program of conservation and restoration of degraded lands and water
control which will integrate the following components:
• Conservation and restoration of lands,
• Mobilization and control of water resources,
(cid:4) Sub-program on land silting control
(cid:4) Sub-program community forestry and of natural resources management which will
include, among other components:
• Multi-purpose reforestation;
• Development of forest by-products;
• Agroforestry,
• Natural resources Management (extension);
• Development and management of natural forests;
• Control of bush fires
• Control of weeds
b) In the area of climatic and environmental effects and constraints control,
desertification control and natural resources management mechanisms
establishment
(cid:4) Sub-program on strengthening capacities of desertification and drought
monitoring and follow up services which will focus mainly on the following
components:

--- Page 55 ---
55
• Sensitization, information and training on desertification control and natural
resources management,
• Strengthening the capacities of desertification and drought monitoring and
follow-up services.
c) In the area of DC/NRN/DEA monitoring and follow-up
(cid:4) Sub-program for DC/NRN/DEA monitoring and follow-up
• Determination of relevant physical, biological, socio-ecenomic and cultural
indicators in the area of DC/NRN/DEA
• Design of a national desertification monitoring and follow-up system.

--- Page 56 ---
56
Priority subprograms of PAN/LCD/GRN
Priorities Sub-programs Objectives Expected results Observations
Natural resources Sub-program on To restore the productive - The productive capital
management and conservation and capital in view of will restored;
production method restoration of degraded improving agricultural
lands and water and animal breeding - The agricultural and
resources control productions animal breeding
production outputs will Cost estimates and
Strengthening be increased; financing seeking
agricultural and breeding
productions - Surface waters will be
used for agricultural and
breeding productions ,
- Production systems will
be improved
Land silting up control To secure agricultural - lands and basins yields
sub-program and animal breeding will be improved
productions
- socio-economic Cost estimates and
infrastructure will be financing seeking
protected

--- Page 57 ---
57
Community forestry and - To improve the - the fish-breeding
natural resources environment and production will be
management sub- agricultural output increased by more than
program increase communities 50%
incomes and meet their
food needs - socio-economic
infrastructures will be Cost estimates and
- To ensure the protected financing seeking
sustainable management
- fish production will be
of natural resources
increased by more than
50%.
- To improve agricultural
productivity and increase
- water plans devoted to
of fodder availability
fish breeding will be
restored
- national resources will
be rationally managed in
view of agricultural and
animal breeding
productions
- soil fertility will be
managed by agroforest
plantations
- To ensure a - Yields will be increased
sustainable management thanks to the plantations
of forest resources and of windbreaks and
improve communities quickset hedges
incomes
- agricultural incomes will
- environment be improved

--- Page 58 ---
58
preservation and
safeguard - development plans will
be designed for
exploitable forest clumps
- rural markets are
established and
exploited
- clumps riparian
populations will benefit
from their forests
incomes
- ecosystems will be
preserved from harmful
effects of bush fires
- pastoral and wildlife
resources will be
protected
Climatic hazards and Strengthening of To alleviate drought and - drought and
environmental capacities desertification desertification effects desertification
constraints control, and drought observation through the observation and follow-
establishment of and follow-up services strengthening of up arrangements will be
supporting mechanisms sub-program concerned services. strengthened . Cost estimates and
of desertification control financing seeking
and natural resources To strengthen local - recommendations by
management capacities and promote services will be taking
partnership for the into account and
DC/NRM. systematically applied.
- the SID will be set up

--- Page 59 ---
59
and become operational
- civil populations will be
informed about the
desertification effects,
- youth and women will
actively participate in
desertification control
activities.
DC/NRM follow-up and Determination of To determine relevant • The national and Cost estimates and
assessment Indicators sub-program physical, biological, local capacities in the financing seeking
socio-economi and area of DC/NRM will
cultural indicators in the be enhanced
area of DC/NRM • Relevant bio-physical
indicators including
water erosion, wind
erosion, green cover
degradation, human
settlement will be
used to monitor
desertification
• Relevant indicators of
follow-
up/aaseesment in the
implementation of the
PAN/LCD/GRN will
be designed in
accordance with the
arrangement made
by C0 P2 CCD

--- Page 60 ---
60
III. 4 Emergency Actions
Priorities defined in the PAN/LCD-GRN which aim at providing an answer to combat
desertification and alleviate drought effects and start productive capital restoration in
the view of a sustainable development through an integrated strategy, will be
executed in the long term. However, during the environmental diagnostic assessment
realization, populations had expressed their real and pressing needs. Before the
implementation of the priorities and to guarantee the success of PAN/LCD-GRN
process, it is consequently imperative to take, without delay, provisions likely to stop
productive capital degradation, to show the government will, and make population
aware that their implication is essential and determining. It is in this sense that urgent
actions are planned both as pilot actions and a strategy of adhesion and mobilization
of different partners in the PAN/LCD-GRN implementation process; in sum what is at
stake is sensitizing and training beneficiary populations and program actors through
concrete actions.
The urgent actions are small operations of productive capital protection, in the short
and medium terms, the recovery of the capital whose degradation is still limited
and/or the preparation of some large scale actions in the medium and long terms.
They aim at satisfying the real pressing needs expressed by the populations,
designed and realized locally by means of appropriate technologies and affordable
budgets in short time.

--- Page 61 ---
61
Table of Urgent Actions
Strategic Orientations/Priority Actions Possible Urgent Actions Localization (*) = all
the regions

--- Page 62 ---
62
1.1 Productive capital restoration 1.1.1. Dunes fixation(at the river *
level in particular)
1.1.2. Control of silting up of *
stretches of water and
streams including the river.
*
1.1.3. Treatment of koris/
watersheds
1.1.4. Recovery of degraded lands *
(Zaï, half-moons, dikes,
etc...)
*
1.1.5. Protection, bushfires
control
1.1.6. Development of pasturage *
areas/delimitation of animals
routes.
1.1.7. Control of weeds *
(cordifolia, water
hyacinth, Pestia stratoids)
1.1.8. Extension of soils, and water
conservation and *
management techniques;
1.1.9. Creation/improvement of *
silvicultural potential
1.1.10 .Improvement of the *
knowledge of resources
1.1.11. Recovery and protection
of natural regeneration *
1.1.12.Generalization of the
implementation of the
domestic energy strategy *
1.1.13.Establishment of small
water retention and the
development of ponds for
agriculture forestry and
breeding *
.
.

--- Page 63 ---
63
1.1.14.Rehabilitation of
traditional practices of trees
plantation during some socio- *
cultural celebrations.
1.2. Realization of Agriculture, 1.2.1.Realization of roads to open
Forestry and Breeding products up production areas and encourage
transportation And conservation inter and cross-regional exchanges
infrastructures.
1.2.2. Building of conservation,
storage infrastructures for products
from local materials and local
expertise
1.2.3. Support to the development
of small scale food processing units
(traditional and semi traditional)
1.2.4. Protection of the RN1 road
Zinder-Diffa against silting-up.
1.3. Improvement of women 1.3.1. Creating income
conditions of life and work in rural generating activities (bovine
area. fattening, loan for small scale trade,
off season farming, poultry farming
etc.)
1.3.2. Acquisition of domestic works
lightening equipment (grain mill,
husking machines, and high-
performance means of drainage).
III.5. PAN/LCD-GRN Implementation
III.5.1. Implementation methods
The PAN/LCD-GRN will be translated into regional, sub-regional and local action
programs by taking into consideration the ongoing decentralization process in Niger
(Map III. 2 in annex).
At the local level (municipality), action programs for combating desertification
and natural resources management will be the outcome of
“ land management” approach and will act as local Development plans.

--- Page 64 ---
64
III.5.2. Implementation legal, regulatory institutional and organizational framework.
III.5.2.1. Legal and regulatory framework
The diagnostic analysis showed that Niger has elaborated laws encouraging LCD-
GRN activities. However, this legal environment needs to be reinforced for an
effective implementation of the PAN/LCD-GRN namely following the decentralization
mechanism. Thus, in accordance with article 5 on general provisions of the CCD,
they will proceed to the completion of existing laws and the elaboration and adoption
of new legislative measures. Thus, the following activities will carried out to that effect
:
- finalizing the revision of the law fixing the forest code;
- completion of enforcement regulations of blueprint law relating to
environment management ;
- elaboration and adoption of enforcement law on institutionalization of
environment impact assessment;
- elaboration and adoption of regulations governing the functioning and
organization of the National Environment Fund
- adoption of texts on local management structures.
III.5.2.2. Institutional and organizational framework
a) Implementation institutions/actors
As said supra, there will be a search for partnership reinforcement through a
permanent dialogue among actors involved in the LCD/GRN. The following roles can
be devolved to each of these actors:
Public Sector
• Definition of policies and strategies regarding LCD/GRN and designing
planning tools (inventories of natural resources, development and
exploitation of master plans..),
• Implementation of institutional projects,
• Definition and control of legislative and regulatory framework application at
the national level (forest code, Rural code, hunting code...) and the follow
up of international conventions,
• Coordination and harmonization in implementation actions notably at the
civil society level,
• Realization of heavy works for the rehabilitation of degraded ecosystems
(large glacis areas, dune cords, parks and stretches of water, humid
zones...)
• Facilitating the search for funding,
• Development of international cooperation
• Animation/information/sensitization and supports advice to actors namely
populations
• Research, training and monitoring genetic material,
• Various studies, enhancement/and capitalization of results
• Nature protection, development of zoological gardens,
• Conservation of biological diversity

--- Page 65 ---
65
• Encouraging the emergence of the civil society
• Follow-up evaluation of actions.
Private Sector
• Development of commercial branches (wood-energy, improved fire-boxes,
secondary forest products, agricultural products, fishing and breeding
products)
• Development of private wood production (private treelets production,
private plantations)
• Forest activities enterprises
• Industrial transformations of products (secondary forest products,
agricultural products, fishing products, hunting products and breeding
products...)
• development of pharmacopoeia and traditional medicine,
• contribution to biological diversity conservation (farms and game ranches
development)
• input provision (fertilizers, zootechnical products, pesticides, production
materials, fishing equipment...), contribution to the development of hunting
tourism.
• internal training, information, sensitization and follow-up evaluation;
• support to rural savings mobilization.
Territorial Bodies
• strategies definition at regional and sub-regional levels taking into account
national orientations and policies,
• designing and implementation of and regional and sub-regional master
plans regarding LCD/GRN,
• funding of actions in the areas of LCD/GRN and local development,
• communities forests management,
• information, training and sensitization of populations
• design, implementation and follow-up/evaluation of regional and sub-
regional projects,
• development of decentralized cooperation ,
• creation and development of protected local areas,
• Rational management of hunting areas
• Land security
Rural Communities
• Participation in the design and implementation (including funding) of
LCD/GRN actions: management of forest, fishery, water and pastoral
resources, productions of treelets and reforestation
• Primary firewood production, fishery and apicultural productions
• Participation in setting up and operation of savings and credit mobilization
systems in rural environment.
• Mobilization of human and financial resources for community based
activities,

--- Page 66 ---
66
• Follow up/evaluation of actions
NGOs and Associations
• Design and implementation (including fund raising) of projects in
accordance with the orientations defined by the public sector,
• Training and sensitization on LCD/GRN
• Cooperation (partnership),
• Participation in studies in LCD/GRN areas and enhancing the value of
obtained results,
• Follow-up/evaluation actions.
b) Organizational framework
(cid:1) At the national level:
The CNEDD through its secretariat, and more precisely, through its PAN/LCD-
GRN technical committee, will ensure:
- coherence of the implementation of the PAN/CD-GRN with orientations
defined in the PNEDD, including synergy with the other environment
agreements.
- follow-up/evaluation of the implementation and possibly the readjustment of
PAN/LCD-GRN.
The Ministry in charge of desertification control will be responsible for the
PAN/LCD-GRN implementation coordination. In this capacity, it will :
- Participate directly in this implementation through its technical services;
- Involve the other actors, notably the populations and the civil society;
- Be in charge of the control and technical follow-up of the activities.
(cid:1) At the regional level
The regional, sub-regional and communal councils on Environment for a sustainable
Development will ensure coherence and follow up/evaluation.
- decentralized services of the Ministry in change of desertification control for
implementation coordination, technical control and follow-up and
involvement of actors;
- The local communities will conduct the in-the-field activities. They
will be helped in this regard by both the concerned services and the
civil society.
III.5.3. Human resources mobilization
The implementation of PAN-LCD-GRN implies the setting up of a sustainable
mechanism of human and financial resources mobilization and the involvement of
several partners. In this framework a particular emphasis must be put on the
improvement of partnership among actors through:

--- Page 67 ---
67
(cid:2) A better involvement of the civil society in the implementation of the
program,
(cid:2) Strengthening the operational capacity of actors for the implementation of
actions defined in the program,
(cid:2) Sensitization and information of actors (government, bodies, NGOs and
associations) on the program stakes and the necessity of a consultation for its
implementation.
III.5.4. Financial Resources Mobilization
Before the advent of CCD, LCD/GRN activities funding has been characterized by
irregularity. In fact, national resources allocated were affected by the difficult situation
experienced by the country. As far as external funding is concerned, it has been
uncertain and circumstantial.
This is why the funding of PAN/LCD-GRN implementation will require the setting up
of a stable financial mechanism and a judicious utilization of resources.
This mechanism will draw from the following sources:
- national funding through the state, local governments, the private sector
and grassroots organizations,
- external funding,
- NGOs and associations funding.
(cid:1) National Funding
Financial resources will come from:
- contribution from the state budget in the form of direct grants to LCD/GRN
activities;
- contribution from local governments budgets to desertification control and
natural resources management ;
- setting up of a mechanism for additional resources mobilization from the
private sector and grassroots organization
- voluntary contribution from individuals and legal entities.
All of these national resources will go into an account which will be domiciled at the
national environment fund established by the blueprint law on environment
management and whose main mission is the funding of LCD/GRN activities.
(cid:1) External funding
To complement internal efforts of resources mobilization for LCD/GRN funding
purposes, bilateral and multilateral cooperation partners will be called for through
donations, conditional loans and debt restructuring. Besides world CCD mechanism
will be used to improve external funding

--- Page 68 ---
68
(cid:1) Funding by NGOs and Associations
In this case the State will create conditions which will enable them to mobilize
resources directly from their partners which will be utilized in a coherent and
harmonized way with other actors
III.5.5. Follow-up/evaluation and impact analysis mechanism
Another not less important form of funding consists of making DC/NRM a monetary
income-generating activity through a mechanism which gives incentive to investors,
for example, through the creation of some tree-plantations (firewood production, by
products from non-ligneous species such as the gum-tree), the development of
industrial fisheries etc.
In line with the stipulations of article 9 of the convention, the realization of the
program’s objectives requires among other things, the follow up evaluation and
identification of the impact of actions to implement. This therefore implies the setting
up of a true mechanism of international and external follow-up evaluation and
analysis of social and cultural transformations induced by the program on the
productive capital, at ecological, economic, sociological and cultural levels. The goal
aimed at, is to identify and preferably present to the various actors of the program
(populations, policy-makers) and to the international community through the CCD
permanent secretariat, progresses recorded in desertification control and natural
resources sustainable management. The information will then enable to take
concerted decision on the performances of the program implementation strategy.
To reach this goal, the follow-up/evaluation and impact mechanism requires
the direct or indirect participation of all and it will operate as follows:
a) Internal follow –up/ evaluation
A decentralized follow–up/evaluation system, negotiated with actors will be set
up at the level of all sub-programs through follow-up evaluation units which will be
established for this purpose. It will work on the basis of information collection,
analysis, elaboration and dissemination system on the implementation of the
program. The information will enable to orientate if necessary the
planning/programming of actions.
b) External Follow-up evaluation
It will be piloted by the CNEDD executive secretariat in close cooperation with
the DC/NRN Committee and the decentralized services of the Ministry in charge of
DC. These structures mission is to evaluate the participation level of action program
sub-programs vis à vis sustainable development objectives as defined in the
PAN/LCD-GRN.
c) Impact Follow-up
An impact follow-up system of desertification control and natural resources
management program will be set up and coordinated by follow-up/evaluation units. It
will consist in, on the basis of some ecological, economic and social impact
indicators, searching periodically for macro and micro-economic transformations

--- Page 69 ---
69
induced by the program. This system will call upon specialized international, regional,
sub-regional and national organizations namely UNEP, observatoire du Sahara et du
Sahel (OSS), AGRHYMET center, specialized National structures, etc.
III.6. Risks
It should be noted that the PAN/LCD-GRN implementation and the realization of its
objectives can be hindered by some factors difficult to control. Thus, at the program
implementation level, the participation degree of all the stakeholders will depend on
the satisfactory realization of PAN/LCD-GRN sub-programs with as a consequence
the effectiveness of the LCD-GRN.
Another not less important risk is the funding of the program: In fact the
disengagement of possible donor countries for LCD/GRN actions funding in affected
countries in general, and in the Sahel in particular, resources mobilization difficulties
through the world mechanism are factors capable of impeding the PAN/LCD-GRN
implementing. To this is added the persistence of economic recession that Niger is
facing, which would inevitably hinder the allocation of national resources.
Concerning the achievement of the program’s objectives, and may be
compromised by recurrent droughts which would inevitably affect the efforts in
controlling productive capital degradation in an essentially agricultural country.

--- Page 70 ---
70
REFERENCES
Agence Canadienne de Développement International (ACDI), 1996 : Projet d'Appui à
la Mise en Oeuvre de la Convention Internationale sur la Désertification,
Programmes d'Action Nationaux Situation et Besoins (Burkina Faso, Niger, Mali,
Sénégal), Rapport final. Niamey, Niger. 63 PP.
Agence Canadienne de Développement International (ACDI), 1992 : Guide
Méthodologique, Planification Stratégique en Environnement, apport de la prise en
compte de l'environnement comme élément stratégique de la planification et de la
programmation en développement international. Direction de l’Environnement .
version provisoire. Niamey, Niger. 38 PP.
Association néerlandaise d'Assistance au Développement (S.N.V.), 1992 : Étude de
la situation socio-politique du Niger. Niamey, Niger. 90 PP.
ATLAS AGRHYMET, 1998 : Atlas en dix volumes, Centre AGRHYMET, Niamey,
NIGER
Awaïss ABOUBACAR, 1997. Les Ressources Halieutiques au Niger : Inventaire
Environnement au Niger, édition RESADEP/INSTITUT PANOS, 71 pp.
Banque mondiale, 1992 : Rapport d'évaluation Projet Population, rapport No. 10047-
NIR, Division des Opérations Population et Ressources humaines, Département
Sahel, Région Afrique, République du Niger. Washington , USA . 130 PP.
Banque mondiale, 1993 : Niger Country Environmental Strategy Paper, Draft, 15 .
Département Sahel, Région Afrique, République du Niger. Washington , USA . 41
PP.
Bationo A, A.U. Mokwunye, 1991, Alleviating soil fertility constraints to increased
crop production in West Africa: the experience in the Sahel. Fertilizer Research 29:
95-115.
Bureau international du Travail, 1988 : Elevage et développement au Niger, Quel
avenir pour les éleveurs du Sahel? Genèves, Suisse, 147 PP.
Charney, J.G., Stone P.H. and Quirk W.J., 1975 : Drought in the Sahara, a bio-
geophysical feedback Mechanism. Science v.187, p. 434-435.
Comité national de préparation de la CNUED, 1991 : Rapport national, préparé à
l'occasion de la Conférence des Nations-Unies sur l'Environnement et le
Développement (Brésil 1992), projet UNSO INT/91/X 14. 73 PP.
Comité technique interministériel sur la Population, 1990 : Migration, urbanisation,
emploi, aménagement du territoire, Projet de politique de population, document de
base, groupe 3. Niamey, Niger. 54 PP.

--- Page 71 ---
71
Conseil Militaire Suprême, Conseil National de Développement, 1984 :
L'Engagement de Maradi sur la Lutte Contre la Désertification à Maradi. Ministère de
l’environnement, Niamey, Niger. 59 PP.
FAO/Banque mondiale, 1993 : Programme national de Gestion des Ressources
naturelles. Centre d'investissement, Programme de coopération Niger: Mission de
préparation, no.du rapport: 52/93 CP-NER 29, Rome, Ital. 3 volumes.
FAO, 1992 : Développement durable et environnement: les politiques et activités de
la FAO, Stockholm 1972—Rio 1992, Rome, Italy. 89 PP.
FAO, 1991: Document d'orientation du plan d'action forestier tropical pour le Niger
ICARDA, 1998: Wind Erosion in Africa and West Asia: Problems and Control
strategies. M.V.K. Sivakumar, M.A. Zobisch, S. Koala and T. Maukonen
Editors.198pp.
Josette Murphy et Tim J. Marchant, 1988 : Le suivi et l’évaluation dans le organismes
de vulgarisation. Banque Mondiale, Serie 79F. 81 PP.
Ministère de l'Agriculture et de l'élevage, 1991 : Projet protection des végétaux de la
GTZ, Lutte antiaviaire. Niamey, Niger. 190 PP.
Ministère de l'Environnement, de l'Habitat et de l'Urbanisme, 1993 : Plan d'actions
environnemental du Benin, projet de document final, Cotonou , Bénin . 93 PP.
Ministère du Plan, 1998 : , Plan National de l’Environnement pour un Développement
Durable Conseil National de l'Environnement pour un Développement Durable,
Secrétariat Exécutif. Niamey, Niger.121 PP.
Ministère de l'Agriculture et de l'Élevage, Comité national du Code rural, Secrétariat
permanent, 1991 : Projet de loi fixant les principes d'orientation du code rural, édition
révisée, Niamey, Niger. 100 PP.
Ministère de l'Environnement et du Tourisme, 1991 : Plan d'Action National pour
l'Environnement (P.A.N.E), Comité National de Lutte contre la Désertification, Tome
II Programme d'Investissement, Ougadougou, Burkina Faso. 201 PP.
Ministère du Logement, du Cadre de vie et de l'Environnement, 1996 : Synthèse des
travaux du PNAE-CI (Plan National d'Action Environnementale de la Côte d'Ivoire),
Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire . 59 PP.
Ministère des Mines et de l'Énergie, Direction de l'Énergie, 1993 : La situation
énergétique au Niger, Niamey, Niger. 47 PP.
Ministère des Travaux publics et de l'Urbanisme, Direction de l'Urbanisme, 1984 :
Schéma directeur d'aménagement et d'urbanisme - Niamey, livre blanc, Atelier
national d'urbanisme - Niamey . 104 PP .

--- Page 72 ---
72
Ministère de l'Équipement, de l'Habitat et de l'Aménagement du Territoire, Direction
de l'Aménagement du Territoire, 1993 : Contribution à la définition d'une politique
d'aménagement du territoire au Niger, Niamey, Niger. 83 PP.
Ministère de l'Hydraulique et de l'Environnement, 1993 : Schéma directeur de mise
en valeur et de gestion des ressources en eau, Niamey, Niger. 105 PP.
Ministère de l'Hydraulique et de l'Environnement, Ministère du Plan, Ministère de
l'Agriculture et de l'Élevage, 1991 : Plan national de Lutte contre la Désertification,
document de synthèse. Sous-comité Développement rural, Comité ad hoc pour
l'actualisation du Plan national de lutte contre la désertification, Projet PNUD/UNSO
NER 90 X 04. Niamey, Niger. 44 PP.
Ministère de l’Environnement/Secrétariat permanent du PNAE/CID, 1998 : Plan
National Environnementale et Programmes d’Actions Nationaux de la Convention
Contre la Désertification. Bamako, Mali. Vol. I ; 93 PP.
Nicholson, S.E., 1989 : African Drought, characteristics, causal theories and global
teleconnections. 79-100. In Understanding Climate change, American Geophysical
Union.
OCDE, 1995 : L'aide des donneurs en faveur du développement des capacités dans
le domaine de l'environnement, lignes directrices sur la coopération pour le
développement. Niamey , Niger. 14 PP.
OCDE/BAD/CILSS, 1994 : Pour préparer l’avenir de l’Afrique de l’Ouest : Une vision
à l’horizon 2020. Niamey, Niger. 68 PP.
Organisation des Nations Unies, 1990 : Amendement au protocole de Montréal relatif
à des substances qui appauvrissent la couche d'ozone, CN 246, TREATIES-9
(Annexe), Montréal Canada. 16 PP.
Pewe, T.L., 1981 : Desert dust. A Special Paper. The Geological Society of America
Publisher, 303pp.
PNUD, , 1991 : Bureau de Nations Unies pour la Région Soudano-Sahélienne
Evaluation de la désertification et de la sécheresse dans la région soudano-
sahélienne
PNUE, 1985 : Lutte contre en Afrique , documents établis par le service de lutte
contre la désertification du PNUE, volume I, II et III. Nairobi
Projet Energie II, Volet Offre 1990: Schéma Directeur d'Approvisionnement en bois
énergie de Niamey, 120PP.
Programme des Nations Unies pour le Développement, Représentation au Niger,
1996 : Appui au Processus d'Elaboration du Plan National pour l'environnement et le
Développement Durable, Projet du Gouvernement du Niger, descriptif du projet, Plan
de financement, Niamey, Niger. 39 PP.

--- Page 73 ---
73
Programme des Nations Unies pour l'Environnement, 1991 : Manuel concernant le
protocole de Montréal relatif à des substances qui appauvrissent la couche d'ozone,
deuxième édition, Secrétariat de l'Ozone, octobre, 110 PP.
PNUE, 1994 : Convention des Nations Unies sur la lutte contre la désertification dans
les pays gravement touchés par la sécheresse et/ou la désertification, en particulier
en Afrique. Niamey, Niger.71 PP.
SEDES, 1987: Etude du secteur agricole du Niger. Bilan-diagnostique-Phase I.
Niamey, Niger. 333 PP.
SNPA/DB, 1998 :Ministère du Plan , Projet de stratégie Nationale et de Plan d’Action
en matière diversité biologique au Niger. Niamey, Niger. 93 PP.
Sterk, G., 1998: Wind Erosion in the Sahelian Zone of Niger: Process, Models, and
Control
Techniques. Tropical Resource Management Papers, No15; WAU ed., 151PP.

--- Page 74 ---
74
ANNEXES

--- Page 75 ---
75
Tableau II.2.1: Forestry and forestry potentialities
Names of Preservation Surface area Current degradation level Observations
REGION the forests Date at preservation Surface area (ha)
AGADEZ Dabaga1954 1050 18.4 extreme under Disappearance
Kerbougou - 25000 - - used as a Harding zone
Total 26050
DIFFA
Deboua preserved forest 1939 27 - degraded 9/12 forest disappeared
Diana 1938 625 - degraded only 81339 ha remain,
Goudio 1952 92 - good condition out of initially
1942 1120 - good condition ha
N’Boo 1938 185 - good condition
Tansougoukoua 1941 1395 - degraded
Karagou1942 84 - degraded
Ariboudiram 1939 4100 - degraded
Mounouck 1941 61000 - degraded
Garoua 1942 133 - degraded
Loulono1941 100 - degraded
Sissi 1935 1335 - degraded
Total 70196
Preserved Forest Gougoumaria 1976 72 75% of restoration rate
Kayetawa 1976 94
Kalgounam 1976 281
Kodjemeri 1976 156
Gagamari 1976 86
Malam Minari 1976 410
Malganari 1976 132
Malam balmani 1976 333
Toubouram 1977 66
Total 1630
DOSSO
preserved Forest Gourou Bassounga 1937 10000 9900 100 ha classified in 1998 occupied by
Fogha Beri 1948 4438 - overgrazing clearings agriculture and
Bana 1955 738 - excessive wood livestock,
Koulou 1948 2060 - cuttings and illegal increasing
Overgrazing, clearing degradation,
Aging. existence
compromise
Total 17236

--- Page 76 ---
76
preserved Forest Toungaanvant 1960 23862 - at least 50% of the whole over exploitation,
Marigouna Bella avant 1960 43360 - over exploitation,fire
Rôneraies dallol avant 1960 28274 -
Forets du Fakara avant 1960 104524 -
Total 200000 100000
Agroforestry Parks Acacia albida - - - park under value, excessive exploitat°
Parinari macrphilla - -
Vitellaria paradoxm - - -
Bombax costatum - - -
Parkia biglobosa - - -
Hyphaene thebaica - - -
TILLABERI/CUN
preserved Forest Say - 2460 - very degraded strong ion
Ghuesselbodi 1948 5400 - very degraded agicole,
Niamey-aviation - 255 <10 under disappearance exploitation Parc
de W 1954 330000 3300000 abusive
Tera - 44000 - degraded
Boumba - 645 - degraded
Faira 1950 8500 - degraded
Total 391260
preserved Forest Tamou - - - observed trend is the degradation Multiples
Boyanga - 12300 - of all forestry located in the Niamey pressures
Koure - 116625 - wood supply basin
Hamadidie - 37350 -
Diakindi - 31015 -
Autres plateaux - très vaste
Total environ 2000000
MARADI
preserved Forest Kouroungoussaou 1952 2300
Dan Gad Karazomi 1952 134
Dan Madotchi 19524,4
Dan Tourke 1952 650
Guidan Roumdji - 2100
Rigna 1952 25,6
Kandamaou 1952 4928
Gabi Nord 1950 560
Gabi Sud 1950 400
Madarounfa 1950 830
Chabare 1952 795

--- Page 77 ---
77
Dan Kada 1951 5190
Dan Gado 1951 4300
Bakabe 1956 2635
Bimin lalle 1951 48
Total 24900
preserved ForestDagor - - 53
Garinoney - - 53
Doutchi Begoua - - 97
Guidan karo - - 98
Naguidi - - 33
Guidan Atiale - - 61
Koukabiel - - 49
Kornaka - - 227
Ajekoria - - 234
Berle - - 258
Karfin Gaba - - 35
Takounde - - 57
Baban Rafi - 80000 in 1962 15350
Maradi - - 60
Sabon Gari - - 48
Guidan Siri - - 37
Diambali - - 54
Ounwala - - 39
Bamo Bara - - 85
Bamou - - 72
Kouya - - 33
Dan Mani - - 50
Aderawa - - 498
Dan Issa - - 1800
Tibiri - - 2235

--- Page 78 ---
78
Kodaga - - 2945
Tapkin guiwa - - 5820
Dan goulbi - - 3290
Total 33671
Gommeraies Intuila - - 545
Guidan Moussa - - 252
Matoya - - 188
Bader - - 82
Total
ZINDER
classified Forest Takieta 1950 6720
Boubaram 1955 900
Kissanbana
Tounfafiram Nord
Tounfafiram ouest
Droum
Berbekia
Kongome
Korama
Libararn
Dan Ogoma
Kelle
Azjomba
Guirbo
Kaigam
Gadabour
Kourabouri
Kalgueri
Kadara
Karbale
Dawambeye
Tchedia
Desga
Total
preserved Forests forets de bas fonds - - around 10,000 all degraded at more 50 p. cent Agriculture pressure on allpark a accacia albida -
- - all degradation at 50 per cent all these forests
TAHAOUA
preserved Forests Abouboul 1956 72 0
Aboudea 1955 175 31
Bangui 1954 3275 0
Damfan 1955 540 156

--- Page 79 ---
79
Karofan 1955 4020 4020 ((under degradation) Diverses pression
Massouki 1956 80 0
Minao 1955 60 20
Tapkin zaki 1955 1070 123
Tsemaoua - 2367 50 ( en 1975)
Total 11659 4400
preserved Forestforets de bas-fonds - - 28000
Forets de plateaux - - 178000 all under degradation Diverses pressions
Forets de Guieye- - 50
Total 206050

--- Page 80 ---
80
Tableau II.2. PRODUCTION AND POPULATION INDICATORS AND COMBATING DESERTIFICATION AND NATURAL RESOURCES MANAGEMENT
Surface area fluctuation outputs
Populations Surface areas population Dynamics of some major crops (1950 -
Density: 2000)
Sizes % du En % du habitant
Regions
toal Km² total s sq Km Population Population Increasing Population forecast (x1000) per region up to 2050 Surface areas hectares
in 1977 in 1988 rate
2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 Millet :800 +- 315
Sorghum: un meaningful
Agadez 208,828 2.9 667,799 52.7 0.3 124,985 208,828 4.85 297 364 454 577 746 976
beans: un meaningful
198 091 2.6 Millet: 77900
Diffa 156,906 12.4 1.2 167,389 189,091 1.15 266 315 380 466 582 736 Sorghum: 15000 +- 11000
bean: 18000 +- 6529
Dosso 1,018,895 14 33,844 2.7 30.1 693,207 1,018,895 3.64 1,543 2,330 3,579 5,605 8,972 14,392 Millet: 779700 +- 67000
Sorghum: 56300 +- 8374
bean: 607500 +- 131253
Maradi 1,389,433 19.2 41,796 3.3 33.2 949,747 1,398,433 3.59 2,101 3,157 4,827 7,522 11,923 19,130 Millet: 1114000 +- 1120000
Sorghum:697650 +- 46454
Bean:838500 +- 150223
Tillabery 1,725,720 23.8 97,506 7.5 17.7 1,171,822 1,725,720 3.65 2,611 3,947 6,190 9,615 15,497 25,390 Millet: 958900 +- 107000
Sorghum: 153025 +- 61277
bean:377900 +- 101907
Tahoua 1,308,598 18 113,375 8.9 11.5 993,615 1,308,598 2.6 1,922 2,625 3,645 5,160 7,431 10,831 Millet: 831400 +- 94751
Sorghum: 281450 +- 59386
bean:537600 +- 125930
Zinder 1,411,061 19.5 155,778 12.3 9.1 1,002,225 1,411,061 3.23 2,111 3,065 4,525 6,810 10,425 16,155 Mil: 1131000 +- 131587
Sorgho:880600 +- 59823
bean: 537600 +- 152406
Niger 7,251,626 100 1,267,000 100 5.7 5,102,990 7,251,626 3.32 10,851 15,803 23,449 35,754 55,530 87,610 Millet : 489200 +- 342171
P. urbain 656,203 1,114,020 5 Sorghum:2084575 +- 148655
P.rural 4,446,787 6,187,606 3.04 bean: 3279300 +- 440750

--- Page 81 ---
81
Table II.3. Major projects executed from 1990 to 2000, or waiting for funding, with LCD or GRN aspect
Projects titles Source of funding Amount Remarks
Project green Tahoua (phase 4) Netherlands 925.000.000 f cfa Closed
Project utilization of natural resources of Kouré (PRUNKO) European Union, French Fund global 820.000.000 f cfa Closed
environment, SNV
participation project of strengthening village institutions for agricultural Netherlands 1.969.500.000 f cfa Currently implemented
development PRIVAT (phases 1 et 2)
Project North Tera Netherlands 980.000.000 f cfa Closed
Project support to the framework program on poverty control UNEF/UNDP 14.877.404 US$ Currently implemented
(DAP/PCLCP)
Project combating land crops titling Zinder/Diffa FAO/UNDP 3.253.402 US$ Closed
Project development management of lands in the southern region of FAO 2.198.021 US$ Closed
Maradi
TCP support to the management of gum trees FAO 290.000 US$ In the launching phase
Project support to the National development plan for a sustainable UNDP 4.365.710 US$
development (DAP/PNEDD)
Support program to initiatives of local borrassus management Switzerland 4.396.455.408 f cfa At the end of phase I
(PAIGLR) phases 1 to 3)
Support program to natural resources management of the Aïr and Switzerland/Denmark 2.750.000.000 f cfa Launching of phase II
Tenere (PAGRNAT) phases 1 + 2
Project Energy II, phases 1and 2 Denmark 9.403.508.772 f cfa Launching of phase II
Project building without woods Denmark 2.902.813.920 f cfa Launching of phase II
Project-Mainé soroa natural resources management Denmark 521.700.000 f cfa Implementation phase
Project-support to natural resources management Denmark 156.700.000 f cfa Implementation phase
Environment Education program Denmark 300.000.000 f cfa Implementation phase
Project training/ realization of fire break Denmark 5.775.750 f cfa Implementation phase
Project-Natural forest development (BAD) African Development Bank 7.500.000.000 f cfa Blocked launching
Project support to training and assistance in environment Italy 500.000.000 f cfa Launching phase
management (PAFAGE)
Regional project of reserved games “Park W” European Union 1.950.000.000 f cfa Launching phase
Regional project sustainable fishing in west Africa Great Britain 34.000.000 US$ (global A.O) Launching phase
Keita Integrated project (phases 1 to IV Italy/FAO 82.300.000 US $ Implementation phase
Natural resources management project World Bank 42.700.000 US$ Implementation phase

--- Page 82 ---
82
Publishing and supervision:
NATIONAL COUNCIL OF ENVIRONMENT FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
(CNEDD)
==========
EXECUTIVE SECRETARIAT (SE/CNEDD)
BP: 10193 NIAMEY, TEL: 00227 72.25.59, FAX: 00227 72.29.81, E-mail: biocnedd@intnet.ne