--- Page 1 ---
1
UNCCD
National Action Programme
To Combat Desertification (NAP)
The Gambia
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD)
The Government of The Gambia
November 2000
UNSO/UNDP

--- Page 2 ---
2
FOREWORD
Preface
The Second National Forum adopted the “National Action Programme to Combat De-
sertification in The Gambia” in Banjul on the 27th of September 2000. Preparation of the
National Action Programme (NAP) was coordinated by the Forestry Department, the
Focal Point for implementing the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification
in The Gambia (UNCCD).
Formulation of the NAP was the result of a broad, consultative process, involving cen-
tral government and its line agencies, local government institutions, Non Governmental
Organisations and, most importantly, communities all over the country whose percep-
tions, views and proposal were gathered in zonal and divisional meetings, numerous
interviews and statements. At the First National Forum held in November 1998, five
thematic areas were identified for in-depth consideration in the NAP. These included:
Forestry and Wildlife Management; Agriculture, Soil and Water Conservation; Livestock
Production and Range Management; Population and Social Dimensions of Desertifica-
tion; and Institutional Arrangements. Five separate sectoral studies were prepared by
international and national consultants, identifying the key issues for each sector, pro-
gress made in the fight against desertification, and areas requiring immediate and me-
dium-term action. Based on this analysis, the Second National Forum was held, and
the final National Action Programme adopted.
Technical and financial support was extended by the Deutsche Gesellschaft für Tech-
nische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ) GmbH, through the Deutsche Forstservice (DFS)
GmbH, the United Nations Sahelian Office (UNSO), the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), the Secretariat of the UNCCD, and the Permanent Inter-State
Committee to Combat Drought in The Sahel (CILSS).
The Gambia is, a small and poor country, but, nevertheless, has made substantial pro-
gress in key areas of relevance to The Convention. Headway has been made in The
Gambia in reversing the trend of deforestation, and the future looks promising in these
areas indeed. In fact, elements of the Gambia Forestry Management Concept are be-
ing taken-up in the Sub-Region and beyond.
The National Action Programme is structured with a brief introduction and presentation
of background information on The Gambia in Sections 1 and 2. These sections set the
stage for the discussion of the impact of desertification in The Gambia in Section 3.
Section 4 covers the NAP preparation process and provides a synopsis of analysis
provided by the five sectoral studies commissioned during the NAP preparation. Fi-
nally, the National Action Programme is detailed in Section 5, including guiding princi-
ples, priority measures, institutional and financial arrangements, and monitoring and
evaluation of the NAP. A brief summary of the Second National Forum with key conclu-
sions and recommendations follows. In Appendix A, a matrix summarises the key stra-

--- Page 3 ---
3
tegic areas requiring priority action. A full investment programme will follow in early
2001.
On behalf of the Government of The Gambia, I would like to express my deep appre-
ciation to the numerous NAP contributors, namely, the Desertification Core Group, the
Task Force on Desertification, the Agriculture and Natural Resources (ANR) Working
Group, representatives from technical line agencies, Non-Governmental Organisations
(NGOs), Community Based Organisations (CBOs), national and international consult-
ants, donors, and above all, the invaluable input from the communities.
The Action Programme is by no means an end in and of itself, but a call for action.
Success or failure will have to be gauged against perceivable and tangible improve-
ments in the livelihood of Gambian communities. Hence, there is no “final version” of
the Action Programme. NAP is a process, which involves continuous correction, revi-
sion and refinement.
All institutions, the international community and, above all, the Gambian public are en-
couraged to further contribute to the process through their critical participation.
Jato Sillah, MSc.
Director of Forestry
UNCCD National Focal Point
Foreword
Preface

--- Page 4 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 4
Table of Contents
List of Tables.................................................................................................................6
List of Figures...............................................................................................................6
List of Abbreviations and Acronyms..............................................................................7
Appendix ___________________________________________________________86
Summary and Conclusions from the Second National Forum...............................10
National Action Programme to Combat Desertification
1. Introduction.................................................................................................21
2. Country Profile............................................................................................23
. Physical Context.........................................................................................................23
2.2 Socio-economic Context............................................................................................26
3. Present Situation.........................................................................................28
3.1 The Problem: Desertification in The Gambia - Causes and
Consequences............................................................................................28
3.2 Evolution of Desertification Concerns..........................................................32
3.3 The Institutional and Legal Setting..............................................................36
3.4 Progress to Date.........................................................................................42
4. The NAP Process........................................................................................44
4.1 Steps Undertaken in Implementing UNCCD to Date....................................44
4.2 Conclusions from the Sectoral Studies........................................................44
4.2.1 Sector Study on Forest and Wildlife Management............................47
4.2.2 Sector Study Agriculture, Soil and Water Conservation...................53
4.2.3 Sector Study on Livestock Production and Range
Management....................................................................................57
4.2.4 Sector Study on Population and Social Dimensions of
Desertification..................................................................................59
4.2.5 Sectoral Study on Institutional Framework.......................................64
5. The National Action Programme to Combat Desertification in The Gambia.69
5.1 Development Goal.......................................................................................69
5.2 Guiding Principles.......................................................................................70
5.3 Implementation Approach............................................................................71
5.4 Ranking of Components..............................................................................72
5.4.1 Initiatives Identified in the Consultative Process...............................72

--- Page 5 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 5
5.4.2 Setting of Priorities...........................................................................72
5.5 Proposals for Action....................................................................................73
5.5.1 Priority Measures.............................................................................73
5.5.2 Information and Public Awareness...................................................76
5.5.3 Support of On-going Activities..........................................................76
5.6 Institutional Arrangements...........................................................................77
5.6.1 Focal Point.......................................................................................77
5.6.2 Consultations at the National Level..................................................77
5.6.3 Implementation at the Divisional Level.............................................78
5.7 Financial Arrangements..............................................................................78
5.7.1 National Desertification Trust Fund..................................................78
5.7.2 Revenue Retention Schemes..........................................................82
5.7.3 International Funding Lines..............................................................82
5.8 Monitoring and Evaluation...........................................................................84

--- Page 6 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 6
List of Tables
Table 1 Development of Forest Cover from 1946 to 1993 30
Table 2 Land Use Change in The Gambia (1980 – 1993) 31
Table 3 Implementation of UNCCD in The Gambia –
Timetable of Key Events 44
Table 4 Summary of Consultations Forestry / Wildlife 52
Table 5 Gender Comparison of Socio-Economic Indicators 61
Table 6 Outline of National Trust Fund in Support of Local
Initiatives to Preserve the Environment in The Gambia 80
List of Figures
Figure 1 Map: Administrative Divisions of The Gambia 25
Figure 2 Map: Land Suitability for Upland Agriculture 33
Figure 3 Map: Upland Agricultural Production and Land Reserve 34
Figure 4 Map: Forest Cover of The Gambia as of 1993 50
Figure 5 Proposed Institutional Framework for NAP Implementation 68
Appendices
Appendix A: Summary Matrix of Priority Measures 86

--- Page 7 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 7
Abbreviations and Acronyms
AATG Action Aid The Gambia
AC Area Council
AfDB African Development Bank
AFET Association of Farmers, Educators and Traders
ANR Agriculture and Natural Resources
ASP Agriculture Services Project
CBO Community Based Organisation
CEO Chief Executive Officer
CF Community Forestry
CILSS Comite Permanent Inter-Etats de Lutte contre la Secheresse
dans le Sahel
COP Conference of Parties (to UNCCD)
CPR Contraceptive Prevalence Rate
CRD Central River Division
CRDFP Central River Division Forestry Project
CRS Catholic Relief Services
CSDTC Chamen Self Development and Training Centre
CYSARDA Child Youth Support and Rural Development Agency
Dal. Gambian Dalasis
DAS Department of Agricultural Services
DCC Divisional Coordinating Committee
DCD Department of Community Development
DDC District Desertification Committee
DDF Divisional Development Fund
DDS Divisional Desertification Secretariat
DFS Deutsche Forstservice GmbH
DLGL Department of Local Government and Lands
DLS Department of Livestock Services
DOSA Department of State for Agriculture
DPWM Department of Parks and Wildlife Management
DSFEA Department of State for Finance and Economic Affairs
DSLGL Department of State for Local Government and Lands
DSTIE Department of State for Trade, Industry and Employment
DWR Department of Water Resources
EC European Commission
ECU Euro (Currency of the European Union)
EDF European Development Fund
EIA Environmental Impact Assessment
EIS Environmental Information System
ERP Economic Recovery Programme
EU European Union
FAO Food and Agriculture Organisation
FD Forestry Department
FFHC Freedom From Hunger Campaign

--- Page 8 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 8
FORUT Campaign for Development and Solidarity
FP Focal Point
FRG Federal Republic of Germany
GAM The Gambia
GARDA Gambian Rural Development Agency
GBA Greater Banjul Area
GDI Gender Related Development Index
GDP Gross Domestic Product
GEAP Gambia Environmental Action Plan
GEF Global Environmental Facility
GFMC Gambian Forest Management Concept
GGFP Gambian-German Forestry Project
GGFPP Gambian German Family Planning Project
GM Global Mechanism
GNP Gross National Product
GOTG Government of The Gambia
GTZ Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (German
Agency for Technical Cooperation)
ha hectare
IEC Information, Education, Communication
IFAD International Fund for Agricultural Development
ISCD Inter-Sectoral Committee on Desertification
ISRA Islamic Relief Association
ITC International Trypanotolerance Centre
IUCN World Conservation Union
KfW Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (German Agency for Financial Coopera-
tion)
km² square kilometre
KWNP Kiang West National Park
LADEP Lowlands Agricultural Development Programme
LGA Local Government Area
LRD Lower River Division
M&E Monitoring and Evaluation
Mm millimetre
MDFT Multi-Disciplinary Facilitation Team
MSc Master’s of Science
NAP National Action Programme to Combat Desertification
NBD North Bank Division
NEA National Environment Agency
NEAP National Environment Action Plan
NEMA National Environmental Management Act
NEMC National Environment Management Council
NFAP National Forestry Action Plan
NFF National Forest Fund
NGO Non Governmental Organisation
NPAP National Poverty Alleviation Programme
NPP(SD) National Population Policy (for Socio-economic Development)

--- Page 9 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 9
NRM Natural Resource Management
NWRC National Water Resources Council
PO Programme Officer
PRA Participatory Rapid Appraisal
PRSP Poverty Reduction Support Programme
PSD Programme for Sustained Development
SDRD Support to Decentralised Rural Development Project
SWMU Soil and Water Management Unit
TAC Technical Advisory Committee
T&V Training & Visit Extension
TANGO The Organisation of Non Governmental Organisations
TFR Total Fertility Rate
UNCBD United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity
UNCCD United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification
UNCOD United Nations Conference on Desertification
UNDP United Nations Development Programme
UNEP United Nations Environment Programme
UNFCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
UNSO United Nations Sahel Office
URD Upper River Division
URDFP Upper River Division Forestry Project
US United States of America
VDC Village Development Committee
VEW Village Extension Worker
WB World Bank
WC Ward Committee
WD Western Division
WDC Ward Development Committee
WISDOM Women In Services, Development, Organisation and Management
WWF World-wide Fund for Nature

--- Page 10 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 10
Summary and Conclusions of the Second National Forum
The Second National Forum, held from the 26th to 27th of September 2000, agreed to
adopt the National Action Programme to Combat Desertification in The Gambia.
The Process
The Forum noted that, to date, more than 165 countries and institutions are Parties to
the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD). This means in es-
sence that The Gambia, although a small country in terms of area and population, does
not stand alone in its efforts but is a member of a growing international movement to
arrest the menace of land degradation, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa.
The Forum expressed appreciation to all parties that have contributed to the process.
In particular at the national level, The Government of The Gambia (GOTG), the farmers,
special interest groups, and Non Governmental Organisations (NGOs) who made their
knowledge and insights readily available. For their financial and technical support, the
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ) GmbH, through the
Deutsche Forstservice (DFS) GmbH, played a key role as did the United Nations Sahe-
lian Office (UNSO), the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the Secre-
tariat of the UNCCD, and the Permanent Inter-State Committee to Combat Drought in
The Sahel (CILSS).
The National Action Programme to Combat Desertification (NAP) was developed
through a participatory process. The Gambia signed UNCCD in 1994 and subsequently
ratified the Convention in January 1996. As a first step, the Agriculture and Natural
Resources Working Group set up a specific Desertification Task Force to guide the
process. A series of sixteen zonal level meetings were held all over the country in order
to hear the views of the communities, their immediate needs, and their proposals for
action. These zonal meetings were followed by consultations at the divisional level and
then by the First National Forum in November 1998. The National Forum entrusted the
Focal Point/Forestry Department (FD), to commission further investigations into five
issues of immediate priority: Sectoral Studies for Agriculture, Soil and Water Conserva-
tion, Livestock and Range Management, Forestry and Wildlife Management, Popula-
tion and Social Dimensions as well as Institutional Arrangements.
It is against this background that the National Action Programme was established. The
next steps in the NAP process include:
• Dissemination of information about the National Action Programme and sensitisa-
tion of all stakeholders to the process;

--- Page 11 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 11
• Integration of the principles to combat desertification as overarching and cross-
cutting themes in planning and management of natural resources;
• Implementation of priority measures;
• Continued national and international support to the process of arresting desertifica-
tion in The Gambia and the sub-region as a whole; and,
• Continuous review and updating of the Action Programme.
Causes of Desertification and Main Problems
Zonal and divisional consultations, NAP commissioned sectoral studies, as well as pre-
vious studies clearly spell out that a multitude of causes and problems contribute to the
process of desertification in The Gambia. In all consultations, communities have made
three clear statements:
• Desertification has become a felt and visible problem threatening the production-
base and livelihood of the Gambian population.
• It is perceived that “degradation of the land-based resources” is at the core of the
problem, which includes decreasing vegetation cover, bush fires, encroachment on
the remaining forests, declining soil fertility, and over-exploitation of the rangelands.
• Rapid population growth and its related pressure on arable and non-arable lands
are seen as major causes of desertification and, at the same time, a hindrance to
remedial initiatives.
There is a general understanding that problems are most severe in the semi–arid, Su-
dano-Sahelian zone of the country, which constitutes about 75% of the total land area,
especially on the North Bank of the River Gambia. Satellite images of The Gambia
clearly indicate that the desertification is at the doorstep – in fact, in the North Bank of
the River Gambia, it has already taken its toll on the resource base (see report cover
photo).
The Gambia has made considerable progress in addressing the causes of desertifica-
tion. In many areas, the country has developed efficient tools to manage its fragile re-
source base.
The Department of Forestry has been in the forefront with providing a legal base for
protecting the remaining forests through community participation. The introduction of
community forestry and the joint management concept for state forests is widely con-
sidered a success story, as it enjoys overwhelming local support and wide international
recognition. Significant progress has been made in reversing the trend of deforestation,
and measurable improvements have been observed in areas under community forestry

--- Page 12 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 12
agreements. In fact, in the longest running community forests, no or fewer bush fires
and regulated use of forests products, has allowed considerable re-growth of the forest,
and even for a closed canopy to return.
The Gambia Environmental Action Plan (GEAP) has greatly contributed to institutional
strengthening and the provision of effective coordination mechanisms.
The National Environment Agency (NEA) has developed detailed procedures, guide-
lines and regulations for conducting Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA), which
are being applied at an increasing rate.
The Gambia has launched a major initiative to create awareness for population issues,
notably family planning with a view to improve the well-being of families, women, and
children. This initiative is an important step to address the underlying cause of rapid
population growth.
Soil and water conservation measures have been successfully introduced and the Soil
and Water Management Unit (SWMU) has built up capacity to disseminate simple and
effective technologies at the national level. The measures are currently being applied
nation-wide under the umbrella of the Lowlands Agricultural Development Project
(LADEP).
Providing an environment conducive to community participation is of major concern to
the sustainable management of natural resources. To date, decentralisation and devo-
lution of power to Local Government Authorities ranks high on the national agenda.
Local Government elections are scheduled for the near future.
However, these achievements are far from coping adequately with the increasing task
of safeguarding the natural resource base. Reviewing the results of the sectoral stud-
ies, the Forum noted that despite considerable efforts there is a growing need to inten-
sify participatory trials and research in conservation farming, agro-forestry, and range-
land management with a view to identifying solutions and approaches that would allow
for larger-scale implementation. The Forum further noted that involvement of the pri-
vate sector is almost completely lacking and that grassroots participation, to date, has
been sorely lacking.
It is against this background that the Forum recommended a three-pronged approach
to implement the NAP, based on priorities:
• Continuation of capacity building with communities and stakeholders: Dis-
semination of the NAP process has been insufficient to date and there is a need to
strengthen capacities at all levels.
• Intensification of pilot programmes related to land management in upland
areas: There is an urgent need to identify larger-scale interventions in the priority

--- Page 13 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 13
areas of conservation farming, agro-forestry, and range management. All parties
are called upon to address this task as soon as possible.
• Implementation of priority measures: In order to achieve immediate and visible
impact and to maintain momentum, all partners to the process are called upon to
provide support for the implementation of immediate measures, which are built on
proven technologies and achievements.
Guidelines to Implement the National Action Programme
to Combat Desertification in The Gambia
Taking stock of the widening gap between requirements and available funds and re-
sources, the Forum has adopted the following principles for NAP implementation:
• Mobilisation of local resources wherever possible,
• Strengthening of private sector involvement and responsibility,
• Consolidation and/or reorientation of on-going projects and programmes,
• Focus on proven measures and technologies,
• Emphasis on awareness-raising, dissemination of information to the public and en-
vironmental education,
• Implementation of NAP and the National Action Plans under the Conventions of
Biodiversity and Climate Change in a coordinated manner along with the principles
of the Second Gambia Environmental Action Plan (GEAP II),
• Sustained support to decentralisation and Local Government Reform,
• Enforcement of legal instruments already in place, notably Environmental Impact
Assessment, and legislation of new laws, such as forestry, as appropriate, and
• Seek further Donor support for priority interventions.
Implementation Approach
The Forum identified priority measures, which are critical to The Gambia’s success in
the fight against desertification. In addition to actions required in the various sectoral
areas, support is necessary in the realm of information and public awareness, support
to on-going activities, institutional strengthening, and capacity building.

--- Page 14 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 14
Priority Measures
Having reviewed the NAP sectoral studies as well as previous studies, the Forum calls
on all parties to the NAP process to give highest priority to the implementation of the
following initiatives. Preliminary project profiles for each priority measure are provided
in Appendix 1. A thorough and formal investment programme will be prepared in early
2001, and will ultimately be attached as an Annex to the NAP.
Forestry
The Forum calls on Government of The Gambia, the National Environmental Manage-
ment Council, and the Donor Community to declare the implementation of the Gambian
Forest Management Concept (GFMC) and the Community Forest (CF) Programme in
all Divisions a national priority. The National Forestry Action Plan, adopted in Septem-
ber 2000, identified five project profiles, which will serve as the foundation for funding
requests to be presented in the Investment Programme.
As a matter of first priority, the Forum recommends that primary consideration be given
to implementation of the “North Bank Natural Resource Management Project”. The
North Bank Division is the area most affected by serious land degraded in The Gambia
and serves as the entry point of desertification in the country. The proposed project
aims at collaborative management of natural resources and reducing the scarcity of
forest products.
Other proposed forestry interventions of high priority are the “Collaborative Forest
Management Project”, “Gambian Forestry Research Project”, and a Mangrove
Resource Inventory and elaboration of a Mangrove Ecosystem Master Plan.
The Forum further stressed the need to promote afforestation with fast growing trees,
especially with those indigenous tree species disappearing at an alarming rate and to
give more consideration to aspects of commercialisation of forest products.
Wildlife Management
The introduction of collaborative wildlife management is closely related to community
forestry and can build on the forest experience to a large extent. The National Biodiver-
sity Strategy and Action Plan outlines the requirements to establish collaborative wild-
life management. The Forum therefore calls on GOTG to urgently adopt the “National
Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan” as a matter of first priority. The Forum further
stresses the need to include local communities in the planning, design, and implemen-
tation of protected-areas management plans and to give emphasis to a decentralised
approach, i.e. establishment and management of protected areas in the Divisions. Pro-
grammes in Forestry and Wildlife Management will have to take into account the need
for trans-boundary management.

--- Page 15 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 15
Livestock and Range Management
The Forum has taken note of the sectoral study and forthcoming developments in the
sector, notably the “Livestock Development Project”. High priority should be given to
the “Support to Livestock Development and Rangeland Management Project”
with the purpose of establishing a comprehensive database to facilitate planning in the
area of rangeland management and livestock production. Activities would, inter alia,
include the conduct of a range resources inventory, identification of high-risk areas and
participatory land-use planning.
Agriculture, Soil and Water Conservation
The Forum identified three high priority activities in the sector:
• Address poor land-use practices and to check the trend of soil degradation.
Main activities would cover training-of-trainers in integrated land-use planning,
community based land-use planning and land-use improvement plans at the village
level.
• Check severe upland erosion and related siltation in the lowlands. The pro-
gramme would be based on pilot activities along with the conduct of surveys.
• Develop extension tools to address the issue of inappropriate crop production
practices.
The Forum further supports the request to rally support for staff training and staff de-
velopment.
Population and Social Dimensions
The Forum welcomes the initiatives to support integrated family planning under the
NAP. These initiatives should be seen as an integral part of the IEC – Information,
Education, and Communication approach.
Implementation of a comprehensive reproductive health programme with four main
components is a priority:
• Access to reproductive health and contraception;
• IEC on reproductive health,
• Extension of “FANKANTA” to all Divisions of the country, and
• Youth development projects such as training-in-life skills, sensitisation on sexually
transmitted diseases and viable income generating activities.

--- Page 16 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 16
High importance must be given to activities controlling the spread of HIV/AIDS. The
Forum further welcomes the recent initiative of GOTG to introduce a comprehensive
Youth Policy and calls for participation of governmental and non-governmental organi-
sations concerned to actively participate in the Desertification Task Force.
Institutional Framework
The Forum identified four areas for intervention:
• Strengthen effective public participation in natural resource management
• Incorporate desertification concerns in existing laws and land management legisla-
tion
• Create an economic instrument for local funding of desertification control
• Improve monitoring capacity in environmental management
These items would be addressed through an institutional support programme to
create an enabling environment for effective public participation in natural resources
management.
The Forum calls on Government of The Gambia to establish a “National Desertifica-
tion Trust Fund”. The Fund would contribute to the financing of community-based
activities. In addition, funds would be made available for public awareness campaigns
and environmental education. Contributions of the private sector, friends of The Gam-
bia and both national and international agencies and NGOs would be the initial sources
of funding.
Institutional capacity building for key stakeholders, especially at the divisional
level, is also a priority.
A summary matrix of priority interventions is presented in Appendix A. A detailed in-
vestment programme will be developed in early 2001 and presented as an Annex to
the NAP.
Information and public awareness
The Forum has taken note that information concerning land degradation, its causes,
consequences and remedial strategies is perceived to be inadequate by the stake-
holders at the local level. Moreover, there is a lack of effective feedback regarding the
process of implementing UNCCD in The Gambia. Priority should therefore, be given to
dissemination of the results and recommendations from the Second National Forum –
particularly at the grass roots level. The Forum further recommends increasing media
presence and investigating possibilities to promote dissemination through leaflets and
cultural activities, e.g. music and drama. As a third step, environmental education
should be addressed at both the formal and informal level.

--- Page 17 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 17
Support of On-going Activities
Two initiatives were identified which deserve continued support.
Environmental Impact Assessment
Standardised Environmental Impact Assessment has been instituted in The Gambia,
and is gaining momentum. Guidelines, inter alia, for large agricultural projects, tourism
development and infrastructure have been established. It is necessary to create
awareness among both public and private sector to provide a popular base to support
adherence. GEAP II rightly stresses the need to ensure public sector compliance as a
first priority and entry point.
Conservation Farming / Soil and Water Management
The Forum calls on Government and all development partners to the “Lowland Agricul-
tural Development Programme (LADEP) to consider applying a more holistic approach
to the programme’s second phase; for example, in the forthcoming mid-term review,
components of upland conservation should be addressed along side lowland activities.
There is an urgent need to implement pilot programmes in upland conservation farming
in order to establish proven methods and technologies for wider dissemination.
Full use should be made of the possibilities available under the Rural Finance and
Communities Initiatives Programme.
Institutional Issues
Two key institutional issues were highlighted at the Forum: local government reform
and the national focal point. Coordination and harmonisation with the Second Gambia
Environmental Action Plan (GEAP II) is called to to enhance capacity building efforts of
the country.
Support to Local Government Reform
On-going local government reforms provide the opportunity to promote a spatially inte-
grated approach to sustainable natural resources management that originates at the
grassroots level. The Forum fully supports this process. At the Divisional Level, all ac-
tivities that fall under the auspices of UNCCD should be overseen by the Divisional
Coordination Committees. The current initiative to introduce Multi-Disciplinary Facilita-
tion Teams at the ward and village levels should be strengthened. Such an approach
would allow for better integration of the various initiatives at the grassroots level, e.g.
community forestry and decentralised rural development planning. The Forum calls on
all parties to the NAP and line agencies to adjust implementation arrangements accord-
ingly. Local Government Authorities should also be empowered to affect land reforms.

--- Page 18 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 18
National Focal Point
The Forestry Department has been nominated as Focal Point for implementing
UNCCD. This decision takes into account that the Forestry Department spearheaded
participatory resource management and has a field organisation reaching out to the
community level. At present, the Director of Forestry oversees all UNCCD activities.
Whilst it is recommended that overall responsibility rest with the Director, capacity
needs to be increased in order to cope with the implementation of the NAP. The Forum
therefore recommends that a Programme Officer be made available at the earliest
date.
Capacity Building
There is a clear and felt need to further strengthen capacity at the national and local
level. The Forum calls for adequate provisions under the GEAP II. In addition, every
effort should be made to mobilise resources from on-going programmes such as the
UNDP supported Poverty Reduction Support Programme (PRSP) or forthcoming initia-
tives under UNDP/Capacity 21 and the World Bank supported “Strategy for Sustainable
Rural Development”.
The Way Forward
The Forum calls on all partners to maintain momentum and actively contribute to the
implementation of the NAP. In particular, the following items, which represent “next
steps”, are critical to success and need to be addressed as soon as possible.
Forestry Department / Focal Point
• Disseminate results and recommendations of the Second National Forum at the
district and community levels within two months. Prepare a popular version of NAP
in local languages.
• Seek approval of GOTG to create a unit in the Forestry Department to serve as
National Desertification Secretariat.
• Ensure that GOTG includes the priorities of the NAP as part of its overall Agricul-
ture and Natural Resources Sector Program for presentation in the Donor Round
Table scheduled to be convened in 2001. Prepare relevant funding requests.
• Disseminate results of the Second National Forum and NAP at the international
level.

--- Page 19 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 19
• Seek international support for NAP implementation and present NAP to major do-
nors and to the fourth meeting of the Convention’s Conference of Parties (COP IV)
in December 2000.
• Seek support from EU/EDF funding sources in accordance with the Cairo Declara-
tion and Cairo Plan of Action adopted by the Africa-Europe Summit (Cairo 3-4 April,
2000.)
• Seek GOTG approval for setting up a “National Desertification Trust Fund”; prepare
statute, administration- and disbursement procedures, audit requirements, and im-
plementation arrangements. Identify potential sources of funding.
• Establish a programme and cost estimate for public relations, public awareness and
sensitisation campaigns, taking linkages with other related programmes into ac-
count. Identify sources of funding.
• Explore possibilities to make the services of a Programme Officer available.
• Establish and maintain a homepage of the National Secretariat on the Internet.
• Arrange for a NAP review meeting no later than two years after endorsement of
NAP by GOTG to review progress and to update NAP.
• Seek Technical Assistance for NAP implementation.
The Government of The Gambia
• Endorse final draft of NAP.
• Entrust the National Focal Point with establishing a “National Desertification Trust
Fund”.
• Create enabling environment and consultative mechanisms to ensure incorporation
of principles to combat desertification into ANR planning and implementation pro-
cedures.
• Establish Department of Forestry as National Secretariat of UNCCD. Appoint Pro-
gramme Officer to oversee NAP.
•
Ensure participation of National Secretariat in all relevant planning procedures. En-
trust Focal Point / National Secretariat to assume function as Divisional NAP Secre-
tariat.
Department of Parks and Wildlife

--- Page 20 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 20
• Finalise policy and update legal instruments for community participation and col-
laborative management of biodiversity and protected areas, with special emphasis
on revenue retention, access to resources, and incentive measures for biodiversity,
conservation and sustainable use.
• Call on GOTG to adopt the “National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan” as a
matter of priority in view of the Agriculture and Natural Resource Sector Donor
Round Table scheduled to be convened in 2001.
National Environment Agency
• Harmonise GEAP II with results and findings of the Second National Forum and the
sectoral studies developed under UNCCD,
• Make adequate provision for capacity building under NAP in GEAP II,
• Assist Focal Point in NAP implementation and media-sensitisation campaigns.
Department of Agricultural Service
• Investigate possibilities to include aspects of upland-conservation in LADEP Phase
II implementation, building on the experience of the previous soil and water conser-
vation projects.
• Pursue pilot activities in integrated watershed management and upland conserva-
tion farming.
Department of Livestock Services
• Seek harmonisation between NAP and the forthcoming Livestock Sector Study.
• Pursue silvo-pastoral pilot activities within the scope of the forthcoming Phase II of
the Government of Germany/KfW-GTZ supported Central River Division Forestry
Project.
Secretariat of the UNCCD / Global Mechanisms
• Facilitate and support dissemination of results and recommendations of the second
National Forum.
• Support implementation of the NAP.

--- Page 21 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 21
National Action Programme to Combat Desertification
The Gambia
1. Introduction
Degradation of land resources in The Gambia has reached a critical stage. The fragile
equilibrium between man and nature is increasingly out of balance. The United Nations
Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD) provides a legal framework for coop-
eration among development partners in those countries experiencing serious drought
and/or desertification. These are developing and developed countries, donor agencies,
Non Governmental Organisations (NGOs), and communities at the grassroots level.
Given the multitude of problems and constraints to development, UNCCD has singled
out Africa as deserving special attention. To date, more than 165 countries and institu-
tions are Parties to the Convention.
The Gambia signed the Convention in June 1994 and later ratified it in January 1996.
Dating back to the Sahelian drought of 1972/1973, desertification has been a major
concern in The Gambia. In 1977, The Banjul Declaration articulated the GOTG’s com-
mitment to protect The Gambia’s flora and fauna. In the ensuing decade, Government
employed a series of strategies and activities to deal with the persistent drought condi-
tions. Strategies included actions broadly grouped as: community participation in re-
source management, institutional strengthening, research and development, extension,
environmental education, and direct public investment programmes and projects. Not-
withstanding these early efforts in combating desertification, environmental degradation
continued at an accelerated pace.
To address the underlying causes of environmental degradation, GOTG enacted the
National Environmental Management Act (NEMA) in 1987 and later formulated and
adopted the Gambia Environmental Action Plan. Under NEMA, two key institutions
were created. The National Environmental Management Council (NEMC) is responsi-
ble for overall environmental policy coordination at the national level, and based on
recommendations highlighted in the GEAP, the National Environment Agency (NEA)
was created. NEA is mandated to coordinate all environmental related issues in the
country and the implementation of the GEAP. The NEA subsequently established a
number of Working Groups to facilitate consultation and coordination. The Agricultural
and Natural Resources (ANR) Working Group was the first to be formed in 1994.

--- Page 22 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 22
The GEAP provides the framework for implementation of the three international natural
resource-related conventions The Gambia is a Party to:
• United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity (UNCBD),
• United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCC), and
• United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD).
During this same period, an awareness was growing that Government could not to pro-
tect and manage the country’s natural resources without the assistance and support of
local communities. The community forest management concept was developed in re-
sponse to this realisation, and Community Forestry (CF) was formally introduced in
1991 to compliment state-managed forests. Both the state- and the community forest
management models were merged into one concept, and called the Gambian Forest
Management Concept (GFMC). This concept, a major break-through in sustainable
resource management, is currently being implemented in four of the five divisions of
the country. Recently, The Gambia adopted the National Forestry Action Plan (NFAP),
which is fully committed to further strengthening community involvement and collabora-
tive management of the forest resources.
Following the signing of UNCCD in 1994, GOTG designated the Forestry Department
(FD) as the Focal Point for its implementation, and established a Desertification Task
Force as a sub-committee of the ANR Working Group to initiate the consultative proc-
ess.
Initiatives to halt and combat desertification in The Gambia are being planned within
the framework of the GEAP as well as on-going Local Government reforms aimed at
decentralising power to the local level.

--- Page 23 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 23
2. Country Profile
The Gambia is a sub-tropical country in West Africa with a total land area of approxi-
mately 10,689 km2, a population of about 1,298,000 people and a population growth
rate of 4.2% per annum. The country is divided into six administrative areas: Western
Division (WD), North Bank Division (NBD), Central River Division (CRD), Lower River
Division (LRD), Upper River Division (URD), and The Greater Banjul Area (GBA) (See
Figure 1 Map: Administrative Divisions of The Gambia, pg. 4).
2.1 Physical Context
The climate of The Gambia is a Sudano-Sahelian type characterised by a rainy season
(June to October) and a dry season (November to May). The average annual rainfall is
about 900mm. Although there are indications of a reversal of the trend, there has been
an average reduction of 27% in the annual average rainfall since 1951. The mean tem-
perature is 25oC.
The Gambia has four major landscapes. These are the floodplain, the colluvial slopes,
the lower plateau and upper plateau, with different soil types. The national drainage is
centred on the River Gambia and its tributaries. The River Gambia, which is over 680
km long, originates from the Fouta Djallon Highlands in Guinea.
The country is divided into four main agro-ecological zones namely Sahelian (70.4 km2
or 1%), Sudano-Sahelian (8,035.31 km2 or 75%) Sudanian (2,070.37 km2 or 19%), and
Guinean (506.92 km2 or 5%). The natural vegetation zone is woodland savannah. The
following plant associations can be found in the country:
(cid:1) beach sands and coastal scrub,
(cid:1) coastal woodland,
(cid:1) mangroves,
(cid:1) variously brackish and freshwater swamps,
(cid:1) salty mud flats and salt pans,
(cid:1) riverine (gallery) forests and forests on river islands, and
(cid:1) savannah woodland, parklands, and bush fallow.
Efforts to arrest desertification are aided considerably by two factors: Given the rela-
tively small size of the country, efforts have a high likelihood of success, particularly as
regards popular participation; and second, The River Gambia serves as a natural
buffer-zone to slow the process of desertification. One need only look at a satellite

--- Page 24 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 24
image of Senegal and The Gambia to see the effectiveness of The Gambia River (see
cover photo). Thus its geopolitical location in the largely semi-arid Sahel may afford

--- Page 25 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 25

--- Page 26 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 26
some strategic advantage, but the country is faced with a serious agricultural, food and
environmental fragility that makes it highly vulnerable to desertification.
2.2 Socio-economic Context
With a Gross Domestic Product (GDP) per capita of US $ 360, The Gambia ranks
among the least developed countries in the world. The economy is characterised by its
small size, relatively narrow economic base, low level of literacy, and overall skills. Re-
distributive trade, agriculture, and tourism make-up the main sectors of the economy.
Other areas of the Gambian economy that have been expanding rapidly over the past
years are the construction and telecommunication sectors. Trade and re-export are
strongly influenced by trans-boundary-interactions with Senegal and sub-regional trade
relations. Per capita income is approximately US $300.
Agriculture and livestock production account for approximately 30% of GDP and em-
ploy around 70% of the labour force. While groundnut production was previously the
major export crop (followed by sesame and cotton), agricultural diversification towards
food crops (rice, coarse grains such as millet and sorghum, horticulture) has been
promoted by Government and is being increasingly integrated into farmers’ strategies
in reaction to adverse international trade trends. Horticultural production has steadily
increased during the recent years and already contributes to GDP at the same rate as
the livestock sector (about 5%). Agriculture and livestock-production provide income for
over 60% of the rural population. Attempts to improve the rather marginal fisheries and
forestry sectors round up the current situation.
Tourism is an important industry in The Gambia. Between 1965 and 1998, the number
of tourists visiting The Gambia has increased from 27,000 to 96,000 but has been on
the decline since 1998. Efforts are underway to reverse this negative trend.
The Gambian socio-demographic dynamics combine one of the highest fertility (6.04
Total Fertility Rate) and population growth rates (4.2% annual growth) in the Region,
with a low acceptance for modern contraception (7% use rate). The 1998 projected
population estimate, using the 1993 census growth rate of 4.2%, figures at roughly 1.2
million persons. The population is expected to reach a total population of over 2.5 mil-
lion by 2015.
With a population density of 108 persons per km2, The Gambia ranks among the four
most densely populated countries in Africa, which is clearly one of the most severe
factors causing land degradation. Of particular importance is the age structure of the
population. It is estimated that 80% of the total population fall into the age bracket of 31
years and below; while 71% are 24 years and younger. With such a youthful popula-
tion, a natural population momentum or demographic pressure is guaranteed, whereby
the population density is certain to increase, regardless of short to medium term efforts
to control it. It is only when viewed in the long-term that in-roads can be made into

--- Page 27 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 27
population growth. Clearly, youth will play a key role in determining the success or
failure of any development effort.
This point is made even more clearly when one considers that the heavy out-migration
from rural to urban areas is predominantly youth. They are coming to the Greater Ban-
jul Area seeking better employment opportunities, largely related to the tourism sector.
All the while, women, young children, and the elderly are left in the villages to farm and
care for the land.
Women in The Gambia experience significant disparities ranging from life expectancy,
educational attainment and income. Economically active Gambian women are com-
monly engaged in those sectors where incomes are low, such as lowland crop produc-
tion and petty trading. According to the 1993 Household Economic Survey, the average
Gambian male has an income are nearly four times higher than women. Women in The
Gambia are among the poorest of the poor.

--- Page 28 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 28
3. Present Situation
Desertification is a global problem requiring local solutions. In general, it is understood
as the degradation of dry lands. Desertification relates to the loss of physical and eco-
nomic productivity in arable lands, forests and rangelands. Any frequent visitor to The
Gambia would notice both the visible loss of vegetation cover and the increasing signs
of soil erosion and -salinisation over the last two decades.
3.1 The Problem: Desertification in The Gambia - Causes and Con-
sequences
Desertification is more than the loss of trees and vegetation. UNCCD defines the term
in a holistic way: “Desertification means land degradation in arid, semi-arid and dry
sub-humid areas resulting from various factors such as climatic variations and human
activities.” Land degradation is described by the Convention as a “reduction or loss, in
arid, semi-arid and dry sub-humid areas, of the biological or economic productivity and
complexity of rainfed cropland, irrigated cropland, or range, pasture, forest and wood-
lands resulting from land uses or from a process or combination of processes, includ-
ing processes arising from human activities and habitation patterns”.
In an even broader sense, the process has been understood by many contributors to
the National Action Programme as a social problem in which desertification is at the
centre of a triangular relationship between people, poverty and food security. People
are the main agents of desertification as they create the main causes and are, at the
same time, the main victims of land degradation. However, people’s actions will also be
the determining factor in halting desertification and fostering sustainable development.
What is important in the long-run is people’s vision for the future, their perception of
well-being, and quality-of-life in an environment continually subject to change. And, to
this end, communities in all consultations have clearly articulated three statements:
• Desertification is a felt and visible problem threatening the production-base and
livelihood of the rural population.
• At the crux of the problem of desertification are a combination of factors, collec-
tively referred to as ‘land degradation” - decreasing vegetation cover, uncontrolled
bush fires, encroachment of the remaining forests, depletion of soil fertility, and
over-exploitation of the rangelands. Consultations revealed that there is a common
understanding that problems are particularly severe on the Northern Bank of the
River Gambia.
• Rapid population growth and the related pressure on the arable and non-arable
lands are seen as both a cause and hindrance to remedial initiatives.

--- Page 29 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 29
A multitude of causes and problems contribute to the process of increasing desertifica-
tion, but zonal and divisional consultations, sectoral studies and previous investigations
arrive at similar conclusions:
• The extraordinarily high population growth rate of 4.2% per annum at present has
by far outweighed all efforts to increase economic growth. This not only refers to
the Gross Domestic Product, but to all economic indicators: National cereal self-
sufficiency, for example, has constantly declined from 58% in 1985 to 41% in 1995.
• The high population growth rate, however, is only partly attributed to domestic fertil-
ity. It is noteworthy, especially for the UNCCD partners in developed countries, that
an estimated 20% of the present population are migrants from the sub-region in
search of better economic opportunities, or refugees from other West African coun-
tries torn apart by civil strife. Silently, The Gambia has set a fine example of hu-
manitarian aid in difficult times. This, on the other hand means that the degree of
pressure on the country’s resource-base is increasingly dependent on regional and
even international developments, which can only partly be controlled at the national
level.
• Unsustainable resource-use has augmented environmental degradation. Regular
bush- and forest fires, decreasing fallow-periods in arable lands and overstocking/
imbalanced distribution of animals over the rangelands diminish soil fertility, carry-
ing capacities, and stocking rates.
• Unclear land-tenure systems, being in flux at present, further aggravate the prob-
lem. The weak legal and institutional framework in The Gambia has so far counter-
acted all efforts to effectively address the problems of land degradation and its in-
appropriate use.
• Given the geographic position of the country, namely bordered on three sides by
Senegal, it is impossible to seriously engage in remedial measures against deserti-
fication at a purely national level. This is especially true for the sensitive issues of
migration and transhumance.
It is undisputed that the nation’s resources are at risk of irreversible degradation if cur-
rent land use practices continue. Initial stages such as changes in the vegetation and
reduction in primary productivity of the land can be observed throughout the country.
Most obvious is the degradation of the Gambian forest habitat: About one hundred
years ago most of the Gambian land territory was still covered by dense forests. The
forests were rich in wildlife and provided the habitat for a variety of large mammals,
which are nowadays rare (such as hippopotamus, waterbuck, roan, serval, and cara-
cal) or locally extinct (such as buffalo, giraffe, elephant, lion, etc.). The main causes of
the forest destruction are rampant fires, clearing of forests for agricultural production,

--- Page 30 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 30
and commercial fuel wood exploitation. The process of forest deterioration was further
accelerated due to a decline of the mean annual rainfall.
Table 1 illustrates the process of forest destruction based on the results of land use
studies carried out in 1946 and 1993 in relation to the population density.
Table 1: Development of Forest Cover from 1946 to 1993
1946 1968 1980 1993
Closed woodland (%) 60.1 8.0 1.3 1.1
Open woodland (%) 13.3 17.6 10.7 7.8
Savannah (%) 7.8 31.7 24.8 31.8
Total forest cover (%) 81.2 57.3 36.8 40.7
Population density (person per km2) 25.0 35.0 57.0 91.0
Source: NAP-Gambia: Sectoral Study on Forest and Wildlife Management (1999)
The total forest cover of the Gambian land territory (mangroves excluded) decreased
from 81% in 1946 to 41% in 1993. This is an alarming development, particularly as
regards the decrease in closed woodland. Back in 1946, 60% of the land was still cov-
ered by relatively undisturbed forest. In 1993 this forest type had decreased to a mere
1.1%. Although the forest cover slightly increased by 4% from 1980 to 1993, and de-
spite the fact that The Gambia still has a valuable forestry resource, it is obvious that
desertification control in the country stands and falls with the restoration and sustain-
able management of forest- and woodland resources.
Desertification does not only reduce the nation’s vegetation cover. The Gambia is con-
fronted with the familiar set of problems associated with environmental degradation:
Salt water intrusion into the fresh water zone of the river system; salt water seepage
into the upper aquifer of the fresh water system in the coastal areas; soil salinisation
and -erosion, decreasing fertility of the arable land, and finally, migration.
Land use changes between 1980 and 1993 were recently monitored by the Forestry
Department (see Table 2):

--- Page 31 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 31
Table 2: Land Use Change in The Gambia (1980-1993)
Land Use Category 1980 1993 Change
(ha) (%) (ha) (%) (ha) (%)
Woodland 14,400 1.3 12,000 1.1 -2,400 -0.2
Savannah 121,600 10.7 88,800 7.8 -32,800 -2.9
woodland
Tree & shrub 280,400 24.8 360,800 31.9 80,400 7.1
savannah
Sub-Total: 416,400 36.8 461,600 40.8 45,200 4.0
Total Forest Cover
Agriculture with 84,000 7.4 85,200 7.5 1,200 0.1
trees
Agriculture no trees 226,400 20.0 241,200 21.3 14,800 1.3
Fallow area 138,800 12.3 89,200 7.9 -49,600 -4.4
Mangroves 68,000 6.0 59,600 5.3 -8,400 -0.7
Others 198,800 17.6 195,600 17.3 -3,200 -0.3
Total 1,132,400 100.0 1,132,400 100.0 0 0.0
Source: NAP-Gambia: Sectoral Study on Forest and Wildlife Management (1999)
• The total area under forest increased. This is due to a reversion of former agricul-
tural land (mainly marginal fallow land) into tree and shrub savannah. All Divisions,
with the exception of North Bank Division (NBD), register an increase in tree and
shrub savannah. The process is most pronounced in Lower River Division (LRD).
• Closed and open woodland was reduced by 3.1% per year due to forest degrada-
tion and conversion into agricultural land. Most severe degradation can be ob-
served in LRD and Upper River Division (URD).
• Mangroves suffered a slight but nevertheless alarming decrease in total surface
area; the causes are die-backs due to disturbed water exchange, illegal exploitation
and conversion of tidal areas into shrimp- and fish farms.

--- Page 32 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 32
• The fallow areas have decreased by almost 50,000 ha or 4.4% due to conversion
into tree and shrub savannah, agriculture with no trees or to a lesser extent into ag-
riculture with trees.
• Agriculture with trees remained relatively unchanged and agriculture with no trees
increased by 1.3% per year.
The overall area under rangeland remained stable as well, but considerable changes in
plant species composition can be observed. There is a general decrease in species of
high palatability, such as Andropogon grasses and fodder trees such as Pterocarpus
erinaceus and Prosopis africana.
This leads to the conclusion that virtually all arable lands are cultivated and virtually no
arable land is left in reserve (See Figure 2: Land Suitability Map for Upland Agriculture,
pg. 12 and Figure 3: Upland Agricultural Production and Land Reserve Map, pg. 13).
As illustrated by Figure 2, the Land Suitability for Upland Agriculture map, the most
suitable agricultural lands are located in the Western portions of the country (coloured
in red). When upland agricultural production is factored into the equation, (Figure 3:
Upland Agricultural Production and Land Reserve Map) it is clear that the areas most
suitable for agricultural production are, for all intents and purposes, already being culti-
vated to their fullest extent (brown areas are under agricultural cultivation). Areas which
may appear to be suitable (highlighted in red) are in fact either settlements or existing
forests. Only land identified as fallow (coloured yellow) is potential arable land in this
area. The Eastern portion of the country is by and large only marginally suited for agri-
cultural production, hence more area is left uncultivated in these areas.
Hence, the steady decrease of the fallow lands poses a serious threat to soil fertility.
As observed by the Sectoral Study for Agriculture, Soil and Water Conservation, the
fallow period has been reduced to four years on average and to zero in many areas
under mono-cropping. At present, 64% of all fields fall under the category mono-
cropped.
3.2 Evolution of Desertification Concerns
National concern with the threat of desertification was prompted by the 1972/73 major
Sahelian drought. Coherent public policy actions to deal with its impact on the natural
resource base commenced with the proclamation of the Banjul Declaration and the
enactment of the Wildlife Conservation and Forestry Acts in 1977 and subsequently the
enactment of the Water Resources Act in 1979. The Banjul Declaration articulated a
coherent public policy for the conservation of nature (fauna and flora), which formed
the basis for specific sub-sectoral policies and legislation in the natural resource sector.
The legal actions to rationalize natural resource management functions resulted in the
creation of a separate Ministry of Water Resources, Forestry and Fisheries with an
Environment Unit from the Ministry of Agriculture in 1981, to be responsible for overall
natural resource policy formulation and implementation. The technical Departments of

--- Page 33 ---
33
33

--- Page 34 ---
34
34

--- Page 35 ---
35
Water Resources, Forestry, Fisheries and, Parks and Wildlife Management developed
sub-sectoral policies to guide their day-to-day operational management functions and
rationalise public sector investment in the natural resources development.
The Government adopted an Economic Recovery Programme (ERP) in mid 1985 to
address the looming macro-economic policy failures. As part of the implementation
process of the ERP, the Government enacted the National Environmental Manage-
ment Act (NEMA) in 1987 to address the underlying structural weaknesses and natu-
ral resources degradation of the country. The Act provided for the establishment of the
National Environmental Management Council (NEMC) as the apex policy body for the
environment. To consolidate the gains of the ERP, the Government adopted a Pro-
gramme for Sustained Development (PSD) in 1990. Although these programmes suc-
ceeded in stabilising the economy, they failed to arrest the process of resource degra-
dation.
In response to the underlying causes of environmental degradation, the Government
formulated and adopted the Gambia Environmental Action Plan (GEAP) in July 1992
as a national environmental policy framework. The National Environment Agency
(NEA) was then formed in 1993 as the technical secretariat to NEMC and coordinating
body for environmental management strategies, programmes and projects.
All the public agencies operating in the environment and natural resource sector of The
Gambia are required to operate within the broad framework of the GEAP and in a de-
centralized administrative structure to adequately address the specific environmental
and natural resource concerns of the individual divisions. The elaboration of the Na-
tional Action Programme to Combat Desertification was therefore initiated within the
established institutional framework of the GEAP process.
While the GEAP has registered visible impact in tackling environmental degradation,
the underlying structural inadequacies and weaknesses of the economy continue to
limit economic growth. In response, the Government formulated and articulated The
Gambia Incorporated …Vision 2020 in May 1996. In October 1998 the new Forest
Act and Forest Regulations were enacted, and to implement the agricultural and natu-
ral resources component of Vision 2020, the Government developed and adopted a
Long-Term Agricultural and Natural Resources Sector Policy Objectives and Strategies
2001–2010 finalised in 2000.
At the national level the Agriculture and Natural Resources (ANR) Working Group,
which was established in 1994 to facilitate the coordinating role of the NEA, assumed
responsibility for the elaboration of the NAP. The ANR Working Group is to ensure that
the NAP, like all other National Action Plans/Programmes, is in conformity with the
GEAP. In this capacity, the ANR Working Group monitored the NAP elaboration proc-
ess. Chaired by the Permanent Secretary the Department of State for Agriculture, the
ANR Working Group is a permanent body with representatives from Government insti-
tutions and NGOs. The Working Group's mandate includes the development of a multi-

--- Page 36 ---
36
sectoral natural resources management strategy that seeks to address issues raised
by the GEAP and ensure that the development of Action Plans/Programmes for the
Conventions on Desertification, Biodiversity and Climate Change are carried out within
the decentralised process of the GEAP. The secretariat of the ANR Working Group is
located in the National Environment Agency.
Following the signing of the UNCCD in 1994, the Forestry Department was identified
by The Gambia Government as the Focal Point for the implementation of the Conven-
tion to Combat Desertification. Since then, a Desertification Task Force chaired by the
Focal Point was created as a sub-committee of the ANR Working Group. The mandate
of the sub-committee is to facilitate the elaboration of the National Action Programme
to Combat Desertification (NAP) within the overall coordinating role of NEA. The Focal
Point is the lead agency in all issues related to the Convention to Combat Desertifica-
tion.
3.3 The Institutional and Legal Setting
Conservation, management and development of natural resources has been the
shared responsibility of a multitude of actors since the passing of the Banjul Declara-
tion in 1977. The main players include Governmental and Non Governmental Organi-
sations along with numerous projects and programmes, supported by external Donors
and Financing Agencies. Noteworthy is the almost complete lack of private-sector in-
volvement.
On the side of Government, problems of environmental degradation are been dealt
with at three levels:
• Line Departments of State and their technical departments,
• Local Government organisations, and
• Inter-sectoral staff agencies and co-ordinating councils.
Four line Departments of State and their technical departments are of particular impor-
tance for UNCCD implementation. These are the Department of State for Agriculture,
the Department of State for Local Government and Lands, the Department of State for
Fisheries, Natural Resources and the Environment and the Department of State for
Trade, Industry and Employment.
Among the technical departments, five have been in the forefront of natural resource
conservation during the last years:
• The Department of Forestry, spearheading initiatives to introduce community for-
estry and to transfer management responsibilities for State Forest to village-based
organisations.
• The Department of Agricultural Services, responsible for the promotion of sustain-
able farming practices, agricultural extension and soil and water conservation.

--- Page 37 ---
37
• The Department of Parks and Wildlife Management, the custodian of protected
areas and wildlife in The Gambia.
• The Department of Livestock Services, being charged with responsibilities for
rangeland management and maintaining a sustainable equilibrium between carry-
ing capacities and stocking rates, and
• The Department of Community Development, which serves as interface between
rural population, social services, and the NGO-community.
All departments, in spite of remarkable efforts in the past, are constrained by severe
budget problems, lack of qualified staff and responsibilities not being well defined. With
the majority of operational funds being provided by Donors and projects, Central Gov-
ernment finds itself amidst the well known “dependency trap”. Reduced efficiency, in-
sufficient outreach to the field-level and varying priorities according to the availability of
(external) funds are the logical consequence.
At present, Local Government administrative structures fall under the responsibility of
the Department of State for Local Government and Lands. In addition to the five admin-
istrative divisions of the country, the Banjul Administrative Area and the Kanifing Mu-
nicipal Area comprise the Greater Banjul Area (GBA). The corresponding local gov-
ernment institutions responsible for natural resources management are the six Area
Councils, headed by a Local Government Officer, at divisional level and Banjul City-
and Kanifing Municipal Council for GBA. The eight councils are empowered to raise
local revenues, execute infrastructure and development projects, including environ-
mental preservation. The Divisional Coordinating Committee (DCC) is at the centre of
decentralised development planning and is designated to assume a coordinating role in
natural resource management and protection.
35 District Authorities, headed by Chiefs, and administrative committees in all villages,
chaired by a headman or elder (Alkalo) form the lower strata of Local Government.
While previously elected, the current committees and authorities were nominated and
lack democratic authorisation. Undue political influence at all levels is one of the major
problems for devolving power to the community level.
The role and function of Local Government is not well defined yet. Divisional offices of
Central Government Departments, although linked to the DCCs, often maintain parallel
implementation structures and dispose of greater resources. Major administrative and
legislative reforms are under way to remedy the situation.
Inter-sectoral staff agencies and coordinating councils have been introduced with a
view to streamlining and strengthening environmental activities at central and local
government levels which cut across sectoral boundaries. The NEMC has overall re-
sponsibility for environmental policy making and coordination at the national level. The
National Environment Agency (NEA) serves as secretariat of the Council and is desig-
nated to coordinate implementation of policy decisions. NEMA, the National Environ-
mental Management Act, has also vested enforcement responsibilities in the Agency.

--- Page 38 ---
38
NEA’s Agriculture and Natural Resources Working Group is responsible for the coordi-
nation and harmonisation of all cross-sectoral natural resources development issues
and is therefore of immediate importance for desertification control.
A second, sector-specific coordinating body under NEMC is the National Water Re-
sources Council (NWRC). NWRC is specifically responsible for overseeing the national
water resource development policy and related projects.
Environmental management in The Gambia has been subject to a number of evalua-
tions. One major issue is the fact that NEMC remained dormant for years and resumed
its guiding functions only recently. Although it is widely acknowledged that co-
ordination of inter-sectoral activities through NEA working groups has greatly improved,
there is growing concern about the insufficient impact on resource management at the
divisional and village levels. The problem is being addressed within the scope of the
Second Gambia Environmental Action Plan (GEAP II).
The involvement of NGOs in natural resources management has been on the increase
in recent years. To date, about one third of the overall external development support to
the sector is already administered by NGOs. Prominent among these are Action Aid
The Gambia (AATG), Catholic Relief Services (CRS) and Association of Farmers,
Educators and Traders (AFET).
Two sectoral programmes of Action Aid The Gambia: Water/Agriculture and Environ-
ment/Natural Resources are directly related to desertification control. AATG has been
active in the support of tree-planting and farm-forestry activities.
CRS maintains two programmes with direct impact on natural resource conservation:
Agriculture/Education and Micro-Finance. The Service was particularly active in sup-
porting farm-forestry and gender issues in resource management.
Other NGO activities of relevance for UNCCD implementation include:
• Islamic Relief Association (ISRA): Community-based agriculture and teaching Islam
and the Environment;
• Campaign for Development and Solidarity (FORUT): Farmer training programme in
agro-forestry and water resources;
• The Gambia Rural Development Agency (GARDA): Forestry Environmental Educa-
tion at grassroots level;
• Women In Services, Development, Organisation and Management (WISDOM):
Women training programme in Environmental Protection;
• Child Youth Support and Rural Development Agency (CYSARDA): Programme in
Soil Erosion Control with government institutions;
• Future in Our Hands and Stay Green Foundation are also both involved in promot-
ing grass-roots participation in tree planting particularly with women and schools;
and,

--- Page 39 ---
39
• Freedom From Hunger Campaign (FFHC) implements a programme in agriculture,
water- and natural resource management with mainly women farmers.
In an effort to mobilise the rural communities to assume increasing responsibilities for
their own development, the Government encouraged and facilitated the creation of a
number of community-based institutions. These include, among others, Chamen Self
Development and Training Centre (CSDTC) and Farmers Platform. Both institutions
are involved, to a varying degree, in activities to maintain a sustainable production
base in The Gambia.
For more than two decades and especially after the Rio Earth Summit, foreign Donors
and Financing Agencies have launched initiatives to halt environmental degradation
through a number of projects and programmes. The following list is by no means ex-
haustive and includes only the most important ongoing or recently completed interven-
tions1:
The Federal Republic of Germany (FRG) has been a key Donor through four main
programmes:
(cid:1) Support in the management of the country’s forest resources dates
back to the late 1960’s. Policy reform, repealing forest legislation, test-
ing and implementing community forestry and the Gambian Forest
Management Concept (GFMC) in three divisions are the catchwords to
describe FRG support in the forestry sector. The initiative has gained
wide national and international recognition.
(cid:1) Soil and water conservation measures have been introduced suc-
cessfully and the Soil and Water Management Unit has built up capacity
to disseminate simple and effective technologies at the national level.
(cid:1) The Gambia and Germany have launched a major initiative to create
awareness for family planning with a view to improving the well-being
of families, women and children. The initiative is an important step to
address the underlying cause of rapid population growth and hence de-
sertification.
(cid:1) The National Environment Agency was supported in developing detailed
procedures, guidelines and regulations for conducting Environmental
Impact Assessment. These have the potential of becoming effective
tools to mitigate undesirable environmental developments at the plan-
ning stage.
The European Development Fund (EDF) has played a central role in support of:
1 The respective sectoral studies extensively chronicle natural resource management (NRM)
and NRM related donor interventions in the country.

--- Page 40 ---
40
(cid:1) Local Government Reform through the ‘Support to the Decentralised
Rural Development (SDRD)’ Project. The Project purpose is to contrib-
ute to the creation of a conducive environment for decentralisation of
power to the regional level by providing funds for micro-projects and
community based initiatives, including resource conservation and man-
agement.
The European Union (EU), through the EU/Tropical Forestry Budget Line, provides
the following support:
(cid:1) Concluded in June 2000, the EU provided support to spreading out
community forestry and the GFMC to the Upper River Division. Activi-
ties in URD have picked up for continuation by SDRD under EDF (see
above);
(cid:1) A financing agreement has been signed to support a North Bank pro-
ject to spread Community Forestry. Activity under this project is an-
ticipated to commence shortly.
Building on long-standing assistance from various donors, Soil and water manage-
ment efforts on a national scale are being continued under the umbrella of the Low-
lands Agricultural Development Project (LADEP), supported through African Devel-
opment Bank (AfDB) loans and by IFAD.
AfDB is further in the process of supporting the livestock sector through studies and
projects, both in the intensive and extensive areas of livestock husbandry.
The World Bank has been the most important agency to support agricultural reform
through extension, training, and applied research. Institutional strengthening of the
environmental sector, environmental education and -information have been other
recent funding priorities in The Gambia. The Bank contributed sizeable resources to
the “Capacity Building in Environmental Management” initiative.
UNDP is a major contributor to decentralising environmental action within the scope of
the Capacity 21 Programme. As part of its activities, Capacity 21 facilitated the NAP
process by supporting a number of participatory rural appraisals and zonal consulta-
tions in all divisions of the country.
FAO, besides its core-mandate of supporting sustainable agricultural production, is
traditionally engaged in assistance to coastal zone management and land use plan-
ning.
These numerous Donor interventions proved to be a mixed blessing for sustainable
resource management in The Gambia. On the one hand, they allowed for the transfer
of considerable external resources, which the recipient country would have faced diffi-
culties in securing internally. Even more importantly, they ignited durable reforms, es-

--- Page 41 ---
41
pecially in the forest sector, which enjoy widespread public support. On the other hand,
various Donor interventions were commonly plagued by fragmentation, inefficiency,
and duplication of responsibilities, whereby causing the implementation capacities and
recurrent budgets of already weak line agencies to be overstretched.
Most important, however, is the alarming situation that relatively little effort has been
made to mobilise capital flows from domestic resources. Private sector involvement in
resource conservation and -management is almost non-existent, presumably because
it has not been adequately or appropriately promoted.
The legislative situation in The Gambia, as far as management of natural resources is
concerned, is characterised by a plethora of laws, acts and regulations, partly contra-
dictory and often outdated. Clearly, legal reform has not kept pace with the rapid
changes in the social and institutional environment.
In 1997, NEA compiled a reader with relevant environmental laws and regulations. The
reader, containing only the most relevant laws, has a volume of more than 250 pages.
Almost all potential fields of environmental conflict have been subject to legislation.
Obviously, the problem is not the lack of legislation but lack of enforcement and the
absence of community involvement in formulation and execution of the law. In this set-
ting, where even the public sector finds it difficult to follow its own environmental regu-
lations and procedures, be it because of a lack of knowledge, political will or a lack of
means, it is difficult, at best, to raise a sense of public awareness and obedience.
Realising these deficiencies, Government has taken action to repeal and revise legisla-
tion in three major areas, all of which are of immediate importance to the implementa-
tion of the Convention:
• Reform of the Local Government System and Decentralisation Reform Programme,
aims to create a local government system with a “high degree of autonomy” to
which government functions and powers would be devolved to “facilitate democratic
governance”. The District Authority, Alkalo (Village Authority) and the Council of El-
ders, Area Councils, Ward Development Committees and Village Development
Committees (VDCs) would be the key elements at the regional and local level. The
leaderships in the new institutional framework (Councils, District Authority and Vil-
lage Authority) will be elected.
• Empowerment of Communities in a true sense. This encompasses the forest legis-
lation and the closely related draft of the Biodiversity and Wildlife Bill. Both legal ini-
tiatives recognise that the main factor affecting success or failure in environmental
protection is the degree to which local communities are empowered to control re-
sources. Legislation hence aims at enabling community control over natural re-
sources by sharing responsibilities and benefits. First experience with the new For-
est Act shows overwhelming local support.

--- Page 42 ---
42
• Specific environmental legislation. NEMA, the National Environmental Management
Act, provides a sound base for addressing resource degradation in The Gambia.
What is lacking, are, most importantly, a) public awareness, followed by b) appro-
priate regulations and standards to translate legal provisions into action. NEA has
started two initiatives in this respect. In autumn 1999, NEMC endorsed a compre-
hensive system to introduce Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) based on an
understanding that in view of limited resources and economic constraints mediation
and conflict resolution should be at the centre of the procedure. EIA guidelines for
projects in all relevant sectors and detailed regulations and procedures have been
developed. Secondly, solid waste regulations, and standards to assess the degree
of public health hazards have been endorsed.
3.4 Progress to Date
The Gambia has undertaken considerable efforts to halt environmental degradation
and to address the menace of soil erosion and desertification. The NAP process clearly
revealed that the situation, despite all efforts, is critical. This statement is valid for both,
the physical situation on the ground and for institutional reform measures. A crippling
factor in the experience of community-based agriculture and natural resources related
initiatives has been undue political interference. The success and sustainability of
grassroots institutions were compromised by the high degree of political involvement in
their management.
But fortunately, the picture is not entirely gloomy: Remarkable achievements have
been realised over the last ten years. The state of desertification in The Gambia is criti-
cal, but lessons learnt have led to encouraging developments forming a sound founda-
tion for further action:
• The Gambia has made significant progress in reversing the trend of deforestation.
Largely attributed to recent changes in forestry policy and a shift towards commu-
nity empowerment, the foundation for further action to combat desertification has
been firmly established. Community forestry agreements have been developed for
some 6% of the country’s forests. The longest standing agreements have been in
force for almost ten years and they have proven to be flexible and dynamic instru-
ments that allow communities to develop a strong sense of stewardship for their
forests. No or fewer bush fires and regulated use of forest products have been ob-
served in community forest areas, which allowed the first community forests to
close their canopies again. Community forestry has become an undisputed and
well-entrenched corner-stone of sustainable resource management in The Gambia.
• Recent land-use/land-cover studies have shown, that forest cover in some parts of
the country is on the increase again, and tree regeneration in these areas has been
substantial. In particular, pioneer species including some important firewood spe-
cies have multiplied their regeneration from 1982 to 1997. This development is

--- Page 43 ---
43
probably due to the decline in agricultural activities in remote parts of the country
leaving formerly open lands to grow back to savannah vegetation.
• The ‘FANKANTA’ initiative, to enhance the living standard of the Gambian commu-
nity through the promotion of responsible parenthood and manageable family size
is gaining momentum. The initiative was successfully introduced to North Bank Di-
vision, and is now spreading out to Upper River Division. A mass media campaign
is proving to be effective at sensitising communities throughout The Gambia as well
as in neighbouring countries.
• There are well-established soil and water conservation practices ready for large-
scale dissemination. The follow-on phase of LADEP will likely provide the opportu-
nity to build on this experience and achieve a breakthrough in sustainable resource
management by addressing three key elements: conservation farming, soil- and
water conservation measures and salinisation control.
• The Gambia Environmental Action Plan has greatly contributed to institutional
strengthening and the provision of coordination mechanisms. All three post-Rio
conventions can benefit from the ground that was paved in the past and there is the
chance to extend these mechanisms now to the local level.
• Environmental Impact Assessment as a standardised procedure in major develop-
ment projects is - slowly but steadily - gaining momentum.
• The Local Government Reform is expected to create a favourable framework to
improve the well-being of those, who, as regards environmental degradation, are
both: “cause and cure” - the communities in rural and peri-urban Gambia.
Although there are encouraging signs, two major problems have not been addressed
yet and require urgent attention:
• The loss of biodiversity through habitat destruction continues at an unchanged pace.
The changes in the tree species composition of woodlands and savannahs indicate
a clear trend towards more and more uniform forests consisting of only a few spe-
cies that cannot provide a diversification of habitats for the indigenous flora and
fauna as the natural forests did in the past.
• Impacts arising from reductions in direct assistance to natural resource manage-
ment from foreign sources will require that The Gambia successfully mobilises sub-
stantial increases in capital flows from domestic sources. Sustainable financing
mechanisms for the environment need to be put in place over the near term. This
calls for immediate and direct involvement of the private sector with a view to as-
suming a role beyond a mere “consumer” of nature, to a custodian of the environ-
ment.

--- Page 44 ---
44
4. The NAP Process
Combating desertification is a process that was started in The Gambia long before the
country became a Party to the Convention. In this regard, the Action Programme is not
to be understood as a “final version” but rather, as one of many milestones on the road
to arrest natural resource degradation. The steps undertaken so far in implementing
UNCCD and the main findings are summarised below.
4.1 Steps Undertaken in Implementing UNCCD to Date
An overview, indicating the most important events since The Gambia signed UNCCD in
1994 is given in Table 3.
Table 3: Implementation of UNCCD in The Gambia –
Timetable of Key Events
June 1994 UNCCD is set into force after the Convention was signed by the Inter-
governmental Negotiating Committee.
June 1994 The Gambia signs UNCCD
Autumn 1994 Forestry Department is designated as focal point for UNCCD implementa-
tion in The Gambia.
Spring 1995 A Desertification Task Force is established as sub-committee of the ANR
Working Group to initiate the NAP process. The Task Force creates a core
group to facilitate the process at the national level.
Summer 1995 Government approval of the Forest Policy and the GFMC, start of expand-
ing GFMC implementation.
January 1996 The Gambia ratifies UNCCD
1996 Participatory review of forest legislation
Summer 1996 Establishment of the National Forest Fund (NFF).
1996-1997 Development of ‘FANKANTA’ Initiative
February 1997 Government presents, with the assistance of FAO and UNDP, the ANR
Sector Review resulting in the formulation of sectoral policy objectives and
strategies.
March 1997 The first State of the Environment Report - The Gambia is published.
Spring/Summer Consultations on the 3 post Rio Conventions are held at the zonal and
1997 district levels, which led to the development of zonal strategies, divisional
and national level through DCCs.

--- Page 45 ---
45
Table 3 (cont.): Implementation of UNCCD in The Gambia –
Timetable of Key Events
October 1997 At the first Conference of Parties (COP) the FRG, having had a long-term
partnership arrangement with The Gambia in the areas of natural re-
sources management, was designated as the lead country to serve as
facilitator for the elaboration of NAP.
Autumn 1997 Through Capacity 21, UNDP funds a three-day capacity building workshop
in each division with emphasis on community and agro-forestry training.
Autumn 1997 Farmers undertake two study tours to northern Senegal and Guinea Bissau
to enhance their knowledge on desertification and get first hand impres-
sions of undisturbed natural forest types.
1998 Government elaborates Agriculture and Natural Resources Research Mas-
ter Plan.
August 1998 First Plan of Operation for NAP preparation established.
October 1998 Plan of Operation for NAP preparation revised. Main Results: Setting na-
tional priorities, preparation of sectoral action programmes in a bottom-up
process, start of implementation process. Status, cause and processes of
desertification analysed.
October 1998 New Forest Act and Forest Regulations enacted.
November 1998 The First National Forum is convened and attended by representatives of
farmers, CBOs, NGOs, local authorities, Donors and the Diplomatic Corps.
Main purpose: To provide a platform for discussion of results of divisional
and zonal consultations and to sensitise policy makers. Three thematic
areas: institutional framework and local government reform, agriculture and
natural resources, population and poverty alleviation. Endorsement of insti-
tutional arrangements, i.e. implementation through DCCs. The Forum
commissions five sectoral studies.
March 1999 Draft Biodiversity / Wildlife Bill submitted to ANR Working Group
March 1999 NAP Sector Study on Livestock and Range Management submitted.
April 1999 Gambia hosts the International Workshop on Community Forestry in Africa.
April 1999 NAP Sector Study on Population and Social Dimensions of Desertification
submitted.
May 1999 National report on the implementation of UNCCD published. The report
contains a matrix of benchmarks and indicators for measuring progress in
NAP implementation.
July 1999 NAP Sector Study on Agriculture, Soil and Water Conservation submitted.

--- Page 46 ---
46
Table 3 (cont.): Implementation of UNCCD in The Gambia –
Timetable of Key Events
August 1999 NAP Sector Study on Forest and Wildlife Management submitted.
November 1999 NAP Sector Study on Institutional Framework submitted.
Spring 2000 Draft National Action Programme circulated by FD.
March 2000 Draft GEAP II submitted to Office of the President.
August 2000 NAP First Draft Investment Programme submitted.
September 2000 National Forestry Action Plan launched.
September 2000 The “National Action Programme to Combat Desertification in The Gambia”
is adopted by the Second National Forum in Banjul on 27 September 2000.
The sequence of events indicate that although NAP was prepared in a participatory,
consultative way, community involvement centred on certain key-events, such as the
zonal meetings in 1997 and the two National Forums in 1998 and 2000.
Interim results in the NAP process, especially the results and findings of the first Na-
tional Forum, could only be relayed back to the local level within the scope of field work
conducted during the sectoral studies. This is seen as a shortcoming. To date, avail-
able funds have been insufficient to conduct awareness-raising and local consultations
at the local level for the NAP. All possible efforts will have to be undertaken to circulate
and disseminate the National Action Programme all to communities in The Gambia.
4.2 Conclusions from the Sectoral Studies
The establishment of the National Action Programme was built on three pillars:
• The wealth of experience that is available with line agencies, local government in-
stitutions and the NGO community of The Gambia.
• Consultations at the zonal and district level for the purpose of the three post Rio
conventions with communities and local representatives.
• Elaboration of five sectoral studies, which the First National Forum identified as
being of priority desertification issues in The Gambia.
The sectoral studies were conducted from the period March to November 1999 and
involved both national and international consultants, representatives of line agencies,
local government and NGOs.
The purpose of the studies was to assess degree and seriousness of desertification
and its causing processes in the country, to review the institutional framework, to

--- Page 47 ---
47
summarise lessons learnt from previous interventions and to propose measures for
priority action to be taken up in NAP implementation. There was the clear understand-
ing that proposals for action should take into consideration ongoing activities and obli-
gations, the availability of financial means, regional interaction and overarching na-
tional development goals, in particular the Second Gambia Environmental Action Plan
(GEAP II). Formulation of GEAP II coincided by and large with the preparation of the
sectoral studies. The first National Forum pointed out that synergy in implementation of
UNCCD and CBD and should be sought as a matter of priority.
Results and conclusions of the five sectoral studies are summarised below.
4.2.1 Sector Study on Forest and Wildlife Management
The study identifies forest- and vegetation cover as key elements in desertification con-
trol and the most important indicators to assess the status and development trends of
land degradation.
The total forest cover of the Gambian land territory (mangroves excluded) decreased
from 81% in 1946 to 41% in 1993. This is an alarming development, particularly as
regards the decrease in closed woodland. Back in 1946, 60% of the land was still cov-
ered by relatively undisturbed forest. In 1993 this forest type had decreased to a mere
1.1%. Although the forest cover slightly increased by 4% from 1980 to 1993, and de-
spite the fact that The Gambia still has a valuable forestry resource, it is obvious that
desertification control in the country stands and falls with the restoration and sustain-
able management of forest- and woodland resources.
The peak of deforestation was in the mid-1980’s and from this time the total forest
cover has slowly increased. This increase however, can only partly be attributed to
rising awareness. More important is the fact that groundnut production drastically
dropped due to low world market prices, and consequently, fewer forests were cleared
for extensive cash crop production. Portions of former agricultural lands were even
allowed to regenerate to a secondary tree and shrub savannah. This positive develop-
ment however, should not obscure the fact that the forest cover still undergoes severe
degradation processes due to fire and uncontrolled exploitation. There are two alarm-
ing trends related to this degradation:
• The most common firewood species are being over-utilised to near extinction,
and
• Due to repeated bush fires, more fire and drought resistant species have
emerged, which have little to no market value.
Secondary tree and shrub savannahs cannot provide suitable habitats for many spe-
cies. The reduced biodiversity in secondary forests limits the forest use, particularly

--- Page 48 ---
48
that of non-wood forest products (e.g. honey, bush-meat, medicinal plants, fruits and
edible roots) which significantly contributes to the livelihood of the rural population.
During the past decades, forest management in The Gambia was characterised by
extensive state involvement that started with the state-owned forest park concepts in
the 1950’s. Government ownership of all naturally grown trees became statutory law
with the enactment of the Forest Legislation in 1977 and the Forestry Department (FD)
was entrusted with the overall management responsibility.
As a result of this increasing government interference in the traditional tenure systems,
the local population that claimed traditional ownership of the forests on customary vil-
lage lands developed a feeling of alienation. These negative feelings finally resulted in
their unwillingness to protect and manage what used to be ‘their forests’. As a conse-
quence, forest utilisation practices became increasingly damaging. This behaviour was
further aggravated by restrictive Forest Regulations, a lack of public concern, and ille-
gal forest operations such as misuse of exploitation licenses and permits and the killing
of trees.
The Forestry Department was unable to accomplish the task due to the tense relation-
ship with the population and also because of lack of human and material resources. In
the late 1980’s when more knowledge and experience had been gained in natural for-
est management, it became clear that the Government would never be in the position
to protect and manage the country’s forest resources without the assistance and sup-
port of rural communities. This was the time when the initial community forestry pilot
scheme was launched.
Based on these early experiences in state and community forest management models,
the Gambian Forest Management Concept (GFMC) was developed, forest policy and
legislation were reviewed, the organisational set-up of the FD was restructured, and
finally a National Forestry Action Plan was developed. At present the GFMC is imple-
mented in four of the five divisions with technical and financial assistance provided by
the Federal Republic of Germany2 and the European Union.
The Department of Parks and Wildlife Management (DPWM) is mandated to conserve
and restore natural habitats and their biodiversity within protected areas, and in recent
years also to provide direct benefits to local communities through sound wildlife man-
agement practices and from eco-tourism. Due to the absence of adequate government
support until recently, the DPWM could not contribute much to either the rehabilitation
of the degraded fauna and flora within protected areas, little lone outside them.
Among the most prominent wildlife species to be found in large numbers these days
are the birds, making The Gambia still an attractive a safari destination. Three of the
country’s protected areas are currently open to the public namely Abuko Nature Re-
serve, Tanji Bird Reserve and Kiang West National Park (KWNP).
2 Currently being phased out.

--- Page 49 ---
49
Apart from KWNP, no other protected area has a management plan or any guiding
document to assist in management. Unfortunately, the Department’s activities are not
yet backed-up by an adequate wildlife policy and legislation to assist them in coping
with the changes and challenges of the decade. A new Wildlife and Biodiversity policy
incorporating a legislative review was recently drafted with assistance provided by the
World Conservation Union (IUCN) and is awaiting approval.
The importance of maintaining the integrity of the forests and wildlife parks is evident
when one looks at a satellite image of the Sub-Region. To the north of The Gambia,
the Sine Saloum Region of Senegal has little primary vegetation cover remaining.
While the River Gambia provides a natural buffer against the encroaching desert, it is
no guarantee that desertification will stop at the River Gambia. With the combination of
state forests, community forests, and national parks, there is an opportunity to fortify
this “green corridor” and reverse the trend of deforestation already visible on the North
Banks of River Gambia (See Figure 4, Forest Cover Map of The Gambia as of 1993,
pg. 30).
For both, forestry and wildlife, government budget allocations are insufficient to effec-
tively and properly manage the country’ forests and protected areas and thus to stop
and eventually reverse forest degradation and habitat destruction. While most of the
political and legislative framework conditions and implementation strategies are in
place or are being established, funds are urgently needed to strengthen the capacity of
both departments and for initial development investments such as survey and demar-
cation of community forests and protected areas, establishment of necessary physical
infrastructure, and sensitising and strengthening the capacity of local communities.
Unless the Government further increases budgetary allocations, or donors are found to
support the sectors, or other sustainable sources of funding can be secured, there is at
present little hope that the sectoral policies, concepts and action plans will be ade-
quately implemented. Because of past and present donor support and the possibility of
retaining revenues in the National Forest Fund for reinvestment into the sector, the FD
is at present in a better position to cope with the new policy mandates than DPWM, but
still depends to a great extent on external assistance in order to bring some 230,000
hectares of forest land under controlled management as called for in the Forest Policy.
Consultations were held in all Divisions to obtain residents’ view on strong and weak
points of the sectoral approaches being implemented at present. Contrary to what is
often believed, communities do not see forests primarily as a source of income or land
reserve for agricultural production. Resource access and -use without interference from
outsiders ranks first among peoples motivation. Although the traditional tenure system

--- Page 50 ---
50
50

--- Page 51 ---
51
is often a constraint to land development, the system has proven to be flexible enough
tp a;llow the entering of land tenure agreements provided that all the concernede
stakeholders are involved. Local authorities paly a key role in facilitating such agree-
ments and in acting as arbiters in the case of disputes and conflicts.
Desertification control priorities identified during consultations with the DCCs and
CBOs include:
• To reduce forest fires through sensitisation, strengthening the capacity of CBOs,
establishment of fire breaks, providing fire fighting equipment;
• to introduce controlled/sustainable forest management practices by involving and
empowering local communities and the private sector, and by reviewing the licens-
ing system;
• to encourage private plantation/woodlot establishment in order to meet fuel-wood
demand and to maintain regular rainfall;
• to promote on-farm tree planting/agro-forestry/composting systems in order to
maintain soil fertility;
• to increase peoples awareness on environmental issues, desertification processes,
and the importance of trees and forests for sustainable development;
• to improve livestock and range management by introducing controlled grazing and
by planting fodder trees; and,
• to encourage tenure arrangements/contracts in order to promote tree growing on
private lands, to reduce the clearing of forest lands, and to bring forest land under
controlled management.
Comparing the policy vision of keeping 30% of the total land area under forest cover
and the policy objective of putting 75% of this area under controlled management to
the actual achievements of just some 12% of the target, it is obvious that major invest-
ments and efforts will be required.
It is estimated that up to the year 2010 the sector will require further support until
GFMC has been implemented on a nation-wide level and until multiplier mechanisms
are in place. At this time, external inputs could be greatly reduced since the Forestry
Department, utilising NFF revenues, is expected to be in a position of safeguarding
operational and maintenance works in the long-term.
Based on the analysis of the forestry and wildlife sector and the consultations with
DCCs/ CBOs the study proposes the strategies to combat desertification as shown in
Table 4.

--- Page 52 ---
52
Table 4: Summary of Forestry/Wildlife Consultations
Forestry Wildlife Inter-sectoral
• Ensure the development • Ensure the development of • Increase environmental
of forest policy and legis- wildlife policy and legislation awareness of the public
lation implementation implementation tools and promote sustain-
tools • Establish protected areas able land use practices
• Reserve, maintain, and covering at least 5% of the and techniques
develop forest land re- total land area for the con- • Strengthen the capacity
sources covering at least servation, protection, man- of CBOs in sustainable
30% of the total land area agement, and sustainable resource management
• Ensure that 75% of the use of flora and fauna • Establish and imple-
forest land is managed by • Ensure that all protected ment concepts promot-
involving local communi- areas are properly managed ing the use of energy
ties and the private sector • Ensure active participation saving devices and the
• Refine existing and de- of local communities and establishment of re-
velop further strategies for the private sector in pro- newable energy
the prevention and control tected area management sources
of forest fires by paying • Review the administrative • Support research to ac-
more attention to indige- structure of the DPWM and quire baseline data
nous knowledge and local ensure the co-ordination of • Introduce land use/ land
conditions protected area management development planning
• Ensure sustainable supply activities at all levels within with the objective of
of forest products for ur- the department and with maintaining a national
ban and rural population other sectors/ organisations forest cover of at least
• Increase number and • Support and conduct wildlife 30% of the total land
qualification of forestry inventory and research to area
staff acquire wildlife baseline
• Ensure co-ordination of all data
forestry activities at all • Maintain a wildlife service
levels within the FD and in with an adequate number of
collaboration with other trained staff at all levels
organisations/ sectors • Improve DPWM’s physical
• Support applied forestry infrastructures and equip-
research to acquire base- ment
line data • Provide adequate funding
• Improve FD’s physical in- for sector development
frastructures and equip-
ment
• Provide adequate funding
for sector development
Source: NAP Sectoral Study on Forestry and Wildlife Management (1999)

--- Page 53 ---
53
4.2.2 Sector Study on Agriculture, Soil and Water Conservation
Agriculture is of similar importance in the battle against resource degradation as is
maintaining the forest- and vegetation cover, since agricultural extension and changing
cropping patterns have been primary agents contributing to the loss of land-based re-
sources. There is a continuous conflict between the national development goals of food
self sufficiency and increased agricultural production on the one hand and conservation
of land- and water resources on the other.
From 1980 to 1993 agricultural land increased to 37% of the total land area, while fal-
low was reduced by 35%. According to recent FAO supported surveys, 407,000 ha of
the land are suitable for agriculture; this threshold has already been passed. While
another 147,000 ha are marked “suitable with classification”, Gambian farmers have
started to cultivate this land reserve.
About half the annual cultivated land is used for groundnut production. Groundnuts are
a critical crop as regards soil conservation since they are cultivated on clean-weeded
land that is then left bare after harvest. Average groundnut yields decreased by 20%
from 1979 to 1996. This trend is commonly seen as a sign of decreasing soil fertility.
Monocropping, often in combination with inappropriate mechanisation practices, is on
the increase. According to recent statistics 64% of all fields fall under the category
monocropped, 15% are used for mixed cropping and only 21% of the arable land is left
under fallow. This is bad news for sustainable farming in The Gambia.
Until recently, the backbone of agriculture was shifting cultivation. Shifting cultivation
practices utilise the land resources in order to restore soil fertility. A cultivation cycle of
3 to 5 years was succeeded by 20 years of fallow. Furthermore, cultivation used to be
characterised by mixed cropping of mainly cereals and legumes. Land clearing through
fire, today a major menace, was then an appropriate and labour effective method. In
1946, only 17% of the land surface was used for fallow cropping, i.e. continuous crop-
ping did not exist at the time.
Rice is the second most important crop in The Gambia. The total production fell from
37,000 to 20,000 tons in the period 1979 to 1990, although average yields rose slightly.
This phenomenon can be explained by the reduction of lands suitable for rice cultiva-
tion because of aggravating salt-water intrusions.
The study identifies several key-factors causing the breakdown of the traditional farm-
ing systems and the depletion of vegetation cover:
• The Sahelian drought: Rainfall rapidly decreased in the 1960's,
• Rapid population growth,

--- Page 54 ---
54
• High immigration rates due to rapid desertification in Senegal and political instability
in the region,
• Farm mechanisation with draft animals, and
• Growing demand for more cash crops at the expense of mixed farming.
These problems have been well recognised by planners and agriculturists. However, in
general, more emphasis has been given to improving production than to stabilising the
production system. As a consequence, the focus of interventions has been on increas-
ing yields through lowland development rather than on improving production capacity
through upland soil and water conservation.
A holistic approach to food production needs to be adopted that takes into account the
interlinkages between the uplands and lowlands, not only in terms of erosion and silta-
tion, but also with respect to the integration of agriculture, livestock, and forestry into
one farming system. Agro-forestry and conservation farming are at the centre of such
an approach. The message can be spelt out in simple terms: “The Gambia needs more
trees in order to protect the land resources against ongoing desertification”. Trees have
to be (re)integrated into the agricultural land be it as agro-forestry-, farm-forestry- or
community-forestry systems.
Activities of the Soil and Water Management Unit (SWMU) are highly appreciated in
the country and should continue, not only in disseminating technical improvements but
especially in the extension aspect and the training-of-trainers. There is a standard
“package” available that effectively serves the purpose of soil- and water conservation:
• Construction of multipurpose dikes to protect fields from saline tidal influence.
• Construction of water retention dikes in upland catchments not affected by saline
intrusions.
• Construction of contour berms in the upland to reduce soil erosion.
• Introduction of new rice varieties.
• Protection of uplands by tree planting.
So far, 3,733 ha of rice fields have been identified for potential protection and im-
provement; to date, approximately 700 ha have been protected against soil erosion.
Activities of the SWMU were observed to be a good combination of production and
conservation activities. It is recommended that SWMU give more emphasis to upland
conservation and guide more technicians in other areas and from other services in or-
der to increase the output.
In the past, SWMU activities were supported by the Federal Republic of Germany. This
support has come to an end but the Lowlands Agricultural Development Project
(LADEP) the largest agricultural project operating in the country at present, has taken
up the initiative (see below).

--- Page 55 ---
55
Extension is seen as the second important issue. The Gambia introduced the Training
and Visit (T&V) extension system in 1985/86 with a production-oriented approach. At
present there are about 180 government field extension staff engaged in agriculture
and livestock production. Despite considerable improvements, especially under the
Agricultural Services Project (ASP), conservation-related performance is still far from
satisfactory.
The approach and achievements of the EDF co-financed “Support to Decentralised
Rural Development” programme, currently being implemented in North Bank Division
(NBD), Upper River Division (URD), and Western Division (WD), are noteworthy in
regards to outreach. Multidisciplinary facilitation teams, comprising specialists from line
departments and local government institutions, are the centre-piece of a new approach
to community involvement, encompassing resource management. The programme
puts emphasis on decentralisation and bottom-up planning. The Department for Com-
munity Development (DCD) in URD spearheaded the Multidisciplinary Facilitation
Team (MDFT) approach. The MDFT comprises Agriculture, Livestock, Community De-
velopment, Forestry, Health, Cotton Development, Family Planning, Water Resources
and the Sesame Growing Association, who come together at the ward-level to analyse
the local situation and prioritise the needs, in order to work out a development pro-
gramme. Participatory Rural Appraisal (PRA) instruments are used for the analysis.
Experiences gathered to date are positive, since for the first time all agencies, govern-
mental and non-governmental, in agriculture and natural resources have come to-
gether in order to develop a comprehensive local action programme.
Reviewing the sectoral study on Agriculture, Soil and Water Conservation, it is evident
that a comprehensive intervention package has not been developed to the extent that
nationwide implementation could safely be advocated and attract external support.
There is an urgent need to intensify pilot programmes related to land management in
upland areas. The sectoral study recommends a three - tiered approach:
Firstly, to continue with and build on on-going initiatives that show real promise. These
are mainly the AfDB and IFAD-supported LADEP, and the MDFT approach. LADEP is
composed of five main activities:
• Soil and water management schemes,
• Tidal swamp access schemes,
• Lowland Development Master Plan,
• Support services, and
• Program management.
It is apparent that LADEP interventions, aimed at alleviating poverty by improving food
security, are to a large extent limited to the lowlands -- all partners are called upon to
revise and expand the scope of LADEP, to include conservation farming activities.

--- Page 56 ---
56
MDFT should also be extended to support all NAP activities with a view to streamlining
and harmonising extension approaches. The SWMU needs more partners in the field
to increase the output. SWMU could play a consultancy role to these implementing
agencies. The sectoral study supports the extension of the MDFT approach to all divi-
sions of the country, which should also be seen as a clear sign in support of the local
government reform. It further recommends that on-going initiatives should concentrate
more on environmental aspects, especially watershed conservation. Possibilities
should be explored to utilise the Divisional Development Funds (DDF) to finance land-
use improvement activities.
Secondly, the study identifies a need for the Department of State for Agriculture
(DOSA) in general and Department of Agricultural Services (DAS) in particular to de-
velop, test and disseminate sustainable and production-oriented conservation-farming
packages on the basis of participatory land-use planning: Mixed cropping (especially
legumes and cereals) should be encouraged in order to protect the soil against wind
and water. Crop residues should not be burned but left for mulching or be composted.
Groundnut cultivation on ridges in order to reduce runoff should be tested. These are
emerging elements of a sustainable farming system still to be developed. Land use
planning should not be seen as the sole responsibility of government agencies. NGOs
and Area Councils can play an important role in land husbandry as well. Greater coop-
eration with FAO should be sought. A detailed step-by-step approach to decentralised,
participatory land use planning is provided in the study. In geographic terms, the start-
ing point should be the North Bank of the River Gambia.
Thirdly, the sectoral study on Agriculture, Soil and Water Conservation makes prelimi-
nary recommendations regarding institutional changes needed to improve natural re-
source management. These recommendations would require additional analysis and
vetting at both the national and local levels. Chief among them are:
• It is necessary to improve the process of coordination with farmers – a farmer-
centred approach needs to be strengthened. Production and environmental-
oriented departments should be under one Department of State.
• Legal adjustments are needed to protect the production base. The study dis-
cusses the possibility to formulate and pass a Land Care Act. Under such an
act, any land owner has the obligation to maintain a minimum of trees on his
land and to reduce gully erosion. On the other hand, the proposed Act would
provide, through a certificate of ownership, for the legal right of tree ownership
and land improvements despite of the unclear land-tenure situation. The pro-
posal is still in its initial form and merits further investigations.
• A review of the existing EIA guidelines concerning agricultural projects (e.g.
minimum amount of trees per hectare, lowland activities call automatically for
upland conservation activities etc.).

--- Page 57 ---
57
4.2.3 Sector Study on Livestock Production and Range Management
Rangeland and livestock production is a widely discussed issue in desertification re-
search in the Sahel. Desertification is commonly associated with a feature of over-
stocking, overgrazing, and depletion of accessible water resources. Livestock hus-
bandry has received its share of “bad press” with terms like “irrational”, “irresponsible”
and “incomprehensible” -behaviour used to describe the practices of West African
herdsmen:
• Livestock owners keep large herds for reasons of social status and prestige thus
over-utilising available grazing resources.
• Livestock owners do not sell livestock even when prices are high (perverse market
response).
• The combination of individual ownership of animals and communal ownership of
land leads without fail to an overexploitation and degradation of the rangeland
(“tragedy of the commons”).
A closer look however, shows that these views are, by and large, nothing but a mis-
conception. Although desertification is on the increase, herd population in The Gambia
has remained stable over the last two decade and irreversible degradation processes
have not taken place on a large scale.3 However, there are numerous serious indica-
tors that the risk of such processes starting is growing if nothing is done to change cur-
rent land use practices. Initial stages such as changes in the vegetation and reduction
in primary productivity of the land can be observed in numerous locations throughout
the country.
The fact remains, however, that livestock husbandry contributes, with considerable
variance in regional impact, to the pressure on the country’s natural resource base.
There are three main reasons for this:
• Livestock agriculture in The Gambia is exposed to high climatic risk and high dis-
ease challenge. Most prominent risks are the drastic decline of forage quality on
the natural rangelands as well as on harvested fields during the dry season. Like-
wise the high tsetse fly incidence presents a significant challenge in the more hu-
mid environments of the country, as does a dwindling water supply in the range ar-
eas. In order to be prepared for these risks, herds have to be of such sizes that
even considerable losses can be experienced without jeopardising the reproduction
base.
• The prevailing livestock production systems in the country can be classified as ex-
tensive and semi-intensive agro-pastoralism. A third system of higher intensity, a
form of seasonal stall-feeding, is presently emerging.
3 Figures on cross-border movements of herds, however, are not available.

--- Page 58 ---
58
• Over 60% of all animal feed stems from natural rangeland and stubble grazing,
15% from harvested crop residues and the remainder from household refuse and
agro-industrial by-products. The regular annual shortfall of feeds and forage is es-
timated at approximately 20-25% of the national herd requirements, but is higher
during the second part of the dry season. Suitable dry season grazing is limited to
about 10% of the country’s land surface, which typically falls in the same low-lying
areas as rice cultivation. This competition for land often leads to conflicts.
Livestock husbandry in The Gambia is well adapted to environmental threats but is
characterised by low productivity. Farmers’ readiness for production-oriented invest-
ments into livestock is therefore extremely low. It is against this background that Donor
interventions in the livestock sector have been few in the past when compared to other
sectors and their overall success is judged to be minimal.
The Sector Study on Livestock Production and Range Management has no ready
made solutions at hands either. There is the clear need, especially for the Department
of Livestock Services (DLS), to increase action-oriented research and community-
based extension with a view to developing intervention packages that are economically
viable, socially acceptable, and environmentally sustainable.
Acceptable technical interventions in livestock and range management are, according
to the sector study’s conclusions, agroforestry, biological N-fixation, controlling of live-
stock traffic and livestock numbers, integration of livestock-farming and forestry, and in
the fields of livestock management, livestock marketing and range management. Their
common objective is to reduce the acute pressure on pastures and feed resources by
better matching livestock requirements with the natural resource base and by increas-
ing the efficiency of conversion of the natural resources into farmers’ income.
Socio-economic and policy interventions need to aim at making the social, economic
and legal framework for the livestock sector in The Gambia more conducive to long-
term investment into land by communities and individuals. Revision of the current land
tenure system, improvement of rural services and marketing structures, provision of a
sound data base for country-wide land-use plans and regulations, development of rural
income alternatives and protection of the Gambian livestock sector against subsidised
imports are the most important issues.
Actions suggested in context with the Convention to Combat Desertification are not
specific to this objective alone. The main task is not so much in devising specific in-
struments to fight desertification but to promote efficient, benign and sustainable use of
the natural resource base, in particular in farming, livestock production and forestry, in
an integrated effort.
It can be concluded from the sectoral study that large-scale interventions still have to
be defined. This, any large-scale interventions must take into consideration the geo-

--- Page 59 ---
59
graphical situation of the country that makes “stand alone” interventions almost impos-
sible and clearly requires a trans-boundary and regional focus.
The study identifies various priority interventions:
• Procurement of a solid database for future land use planning, i.e. establishment of
a Range Resource Inventory. The inventory would comprise the analysis of range-
land-density, vigour and biomass, the establishment of categories of rangeland,
production potentials etc. It would serve as a base for land-use planning at the
communal level.
• Development of extension packages for stratified livestock systems.
• The review of the land tenure system.
• Programme to intensify livestock enterprises (range management, biological N-
fixation, feed gardens etc.).
• Livestock Sector Support (test and dissemination of technical interventions such as
multipurpose trees, communal grazing areas, sinking of wells).
The study proposes that the AfDB supported Livestock Sector Study/Project take the
lead in implementing these activities. Given the fact that AfDB houses the UNCCD Re-
gional Coordination Unit, it is further suggested that the Bank supports DLS in coordi-
nating sector-relevant interventions under the NAP. Another important agency for inter-
ventions in the livestock sector will be International Trypanotolerance Centre (ITC) that
has currently launched a feed-garden programme in CRD and supports livestock-
extension approaches.
4.2.4 Sector Study on Population and Social Dimensions of Desertifi-
cation
The study highlights the relationship between people and environment. Drought and
desertification are understood as socio-economic challenges that need to be ad-
dressed through socio-economic policy interventions. People should not only be seen
as agents and victims of soil and water degradation but also as potential innovators
and creators of sustainable land use and livelihood patterns. In particular, women and
youth play a key role in this realm.
In The Gambia, socio-demographic dynamics combine one of then highest fertility (To-
tal Fertility Rates or TFR at 6.04) and population growth rates (4.2% annual growth) in
the region with a low acceptance for modern contraception (Contraceptive Prevalence
Rate or CPR around 7%). The population estimate for 1998 gives a figure of approxi-
mately 1.3 million people, to double every 20 to 25 years. In 1963, the population was
in the range of 320,000. Growth rate slowed down in the 1980’s and went up again in
the 1990’s. This increase can be attributed to high in-migration, as economic hardships
and civil unrest in the sub-region made The Gambia, a relatively stable country, more

--- Page 60 ---
60
attractive. According to the 1993 Census international in-migration contributed 1.2% of
the annual growth rate and an estimated 151,000 migrants aged seven and over were
resident in The Gambia (equivalent to 14% of the total population) by that time. The
majority of immigrants have settled in the Greater Banjul Area (GBA). These immi-
grants were not always foreigners from other countries since migratory cross-border
fluctuations have been a steady feature in the sub-region.
Seventy-one percent of the Gambian population are aged under 24 years, 80% under
30 years. Life expectancy stands at 54 years for males and 56.7 years for females. At
birth, life expectancy for the rural population is 45 years, much lower than the average
of 52 years for sub-saharan Africa as a whole.
A key issue in The Gambia is the “worrisome feature of the youthful nature of the popu-
lation” (UNDP National Human Development Report). This has to be seen against the
background that The Gambia is by all indicators a poor country, as a matter of fact one
of the poorest countries in the region with a GDP per capita of US $ 360. The UNDP
report ranks the country as number 165 out of 175 countries on the Human Develop-
ment Index. . The corresponding population density of 108 per km² places The Gambia
among the four most densely populated countries in Africa. The presence of such a
youthful population automatically creates a demographic pressure on future genera-
tions which means that population density will certainly increase. Clearly, an effective
population policy is an important factor in the long-term success or failure in the fight to
halt desertification.
Government’s recognition of the important role that youths in The Gambia play in na-
tional development is evident, as they have been included as an important partner in
the National Population Policy. With improved education, increased access to appro-
priate training and better employment opportunities, they will play a key role in reducing
fertility rates. They will also help to achieve a balance between socio-economic devel-
opment and population growth and consequently protect the environment from further
degradation.
While the overall country’s population density gives pause, it is only compounded by
the high migration from the rural areas into the urban settlements, particularly in the
coastal areas (e.g. Kanifing, Serekunda, and Sukuta). The 1993 Household Census
found that 37% of the population residing in the Kanifing Municipal Area (68,000 per-
sons) were migrants from rural parts of the country.
Gender disparities, particularly in rural areas, are a critical element, which must be
considered. Given the considerable youth out-migration from rural areas of youth,
women, elderly, and children are the primary labour force remaining in rural areas. As
such, women’s role in natural resource management must be seriously addressed.

--- Page 61 ---
61
The Gambia is ranked 138th out of 146 countries included in the UNDP’s 1997 Gender
Related Development Index (GDI), based on gender disparities in the life expectancy,
educational attainment and income. Women are worse off concerning each of these
indicators than the average for women in Sub-Sahara Africa (SSA), and on all socio-
economic indicators, Gambian women are far worse of than Gambian men (see Table
5).
Table 5: Gender Comparison of Socio-economic Indicators
Gambian Gambian Women in
women men SSA
Life expectancy at birth 47.2 44.0 51.5
Adult literacy 22.7% 50.9% 44.4%
Combined educational enrolment (1994) 27.0% 41.1% 38.4%
Source: Sector Study for Population and Social Dimensions of Desertification (1999)
Although female-headed households in The Gambia do not appear to suffer a higher
incidence of poverty, in general women are amongst the poorest of the poor in Gam-
bian society. Women’s multiple roles and responsibilities impact heavily on the time
and physical constitution and lead to long and arduous workdays. While mechanisation
has improved men’s agricultural productivity, most tasks falling to women continue to
be carried out with manual tools. Economically active Gambian women are commonly
engaged in those sectors where incomes are low such as lowland crop production and
petty trading. According to the 1993 Household Economic Survey, average male in-
comes are nearly four times higher than those of women.
The Gambian society is male dominated and therefore women's participation in devel-
opment faces severe constraints. In general women are paid less, occupy menial jobs
and their participation in decision-making is very limited. By the age of 21, most women
in the rural areas have been married and have one or two children, making child-
nurturing their prime responsibility. They provide around 70% of unskilled farm labour
and are the major subsistence food producers of the society, despite the fact that they
lack appropriate tools, face difficulties in acquiring land ownership and access to credit
facilities.
The process of land allocation is patriarchal in nature. Women’s access to land is al-
ways through men (marriage, inheritance from mother in-laws or borrowing from male
relatives). Land ownership is generally achieved by clearing and preparing land for
cultivation, which is a male task. Women are especially disadvantaged concerning land
use rights in The Gambia. Women generally tend to be given access to lowland rice
fields or other poor quality and more distant pieces of land. Their land is among the first
which will be partitioned if need to subdivide land arises. This insecurity in land use

--- Page 62 ---
62
rights in turn has the consequence that women tend to plant and harvest annual crops
and avoid long-term investments.
In addition, the study identifies various social issues as being of paramount importance
for desertification control as well. Most important is land tenure insecurity, one of the
main reasons for the unwillingness on the side of poor groups of society to invest into
long-term sustainable land use practices such as reforestation, agroforestry, soil and
water conservation. The 1992 State Land Act states that all land belongs to the State
and that all Gambians have rights of access to land. However, land in The Gambia has
traditionally been under founding family (collective) control, empowering the village
authority or the ‘Alkalo’ to distribute and (re-)allocate land for agricultural or other pur-
poses. Only within the urban areas of Banjul and the Greater Banjul Area (GBA) pri-
vate or collective rights are known.
The following classification of the (emerging) land tenure system can be made:
• Freehold - very rare private ownership in urban areas
• Leasehold - land that is granted by the Department of State for Lands and Local
Government on differing conditions in urban and rural areas
• Customary tenure - universal land right for everybody limited by the influence of
traditional authorities. The land may be passed on to heirs and descendants
In the case of range- and forestlands, where ownership is not clearly defined by the
village authority, it is typically perceived that these areas are under “government own-
ership.” Clear, legally binding arrangements between Government and communities,
such as Community Forestry Agreements for example, are needed to regulate the
share of obligations and benefits in these areas.
Other important issues are the high dependency on agricultural income and the prob-
lems in creating alternative sources of income. Although being a controversial topic,
the careful development of the tourist sector is seen as a chance. Creating opportuni-
ties for alternative income must be seen as a necessary additional strategy to reduce
pressure on the natural resource base as well as for alleviating poverty. Farmer’s
strategies to diversify agricultural production or attempts to create new avenues of in-
come should therefore be strongly supported. Access to credit and extension services
need to be improved, especially for women and youth. The credit component of the
Skills Development Project should be closely examined for coordination in this area.4
4
Although the overall project, implemented through the Department of Community Develop-
ment, has been phased out, the credit component under this project is still on-going.

--- Page 63 ---
63
Given the importance of the tourism industry, The Government should further explore
possibilities to create avenues for spreading culturally acceptable, environmentally
sound and economically viable forms of tourism into the whole country (Eco-tourism).
This could create new avenues for income to the rural poor and add on to all efforts in
combating desertification.
The National Poverty Alleviation Programme development goal is the improvement of
the overall standard of living. Being aware of the fact that poverty constitutes a major
obstacle to better land husbandry, and the necessity for the rural population to satisfy
their immediate needs in terms of food and income, strategies to foster rural develop-
ment and alleviate (rural) poverty have to be guided by the following strategic princi-
ples:
• Provide social amenities and improve living conditions in the rural areas,
• Improve services in basic health and education sector,
• Advancement of women's and youth's participation and contributions to
development,
• Intensification and diversification of agricultural production,
• Creation of alternative income opportunities,
• Reduce rural-urban migration of youth,
• Creation of an enabling environment for sustainable land use,
• Support decentralisation efforts, and
• Strengthen information, education and communication (IEC) programmes.
However, desertification control in The Gambia stands and falls with successful at-
tempts to re-establish a balance between natural resource base, economic- and popu-
lation growth. The National Population Programme Framework has defined three pillars
of intervention:
• Reproductive / sexual health and family planning,
• population and development strategies,
• advocacy/information, education, communication (IEC).
The sector study strongly advocates support to this approach under NAP, inter alia
through taking up and further disseminating the ‘FANKANTA’ Initiative. The concept of
the ‘FANKANTA’ initiative was developed in 1996 and 1997 through nationwide consul-
tations of communities, health workers, religious and community leaders. The idea was
to find a local word or concept to be understood by the major ethnic groups in The
Gambia and to depict family welfare, health, protection, and prosperity. ‘FANKANTA’
was selected to stand for positive family values encouraging parents to have the num-
ber of safely spaced and healthy children they can adequately provide for. It possesses
a much broader, more comprehensive vision than is reflected by family planning alone.
Extensive sensitisation of community, political and religious leaders are carried out
before officially launching in a specific region. The health personnel of the respective

--- Page 64 ---
64
division are trained in counselling, communication strategies and provision of quality
family planning services to meet the needs of the population.
The promotion of the ‘FANKANTA’ initiative has created a new dynamic process with
the support of all relevant institutions using participatory approaches. Interviews and
focus group discussions at community level show that the initiative is understood as a
comprehensive approach for socio-economic development. Intensive use of modern
communication channels particularly the mass media increase people's awareness of
the ‘FANKANTA’ concept. Standard ‘FANKANTA’ Initiative packages for implementa-
tion are available now. ‘FANKANTA’ was tested in the North Bank Division (NBD) and
is now ready for country-wide dissemination and propagation.
The study points at the linkage between FANKANTA at community level and propaga-
tion through MDFT and the need to develop a widely accepted adolescent reproductive
health strategy, especially for adolescents in urban settings.
4.2.5 Sector Study on Institutional Framework
UNCCD marks a conceptual break-through since it not only identify climatic, social and
behavioural causes for the spreading menace of global desertification, as traditionally
is the case, but lays equal emphasis on the need to create a conducive institutional
framework.
The Gambia has been a forerunner in environmental awareness and adaptation of the
country’s institutional framework since passing of the Banjul Declaration in 1977. There
are a number of the lessons learnt from more than two decades of institutional reshap-
ing and reform.
• Although appropriate, the past natural resource-specific institutional initiatives were
belated and inadequate and could not arrest natural resource degradation. Simi-
larly, the agriculture and natural resource sector-wide institutional initiatives were
opportune but could not be effectively sustained mainly due to political interference.
To date, numerous institutions are dealing with management and preservation of
natural resources in The Gambia. The burden of maintenance of these various sets
of institutions on the public budget is becoming unsustainable.
• The key constraints limiting performance are understaffing, inadequate equipment
and inadequate budgetary provisions. For example, the Department of Livestock
Services (DLS) has only 12 qualified veterinarians out of a minimum staff require-
ment of about 35 professionals. The Department of Parks and Wildlife Manage-
ment (DPWM) has a staff enrolment of 40 people of which only three are profes-
sionals, three are diploma holders and the rest are support staff of various catego-

--- Page 65 ---
65
ries and levels of education. The Forestry Department (FD) has only 7 profession-
als, 13 middle level staff, 36 low-level forest guards and 59 casual labourers.
• Parastatal type institutions responsible for agriculture and natural resource man-
agement on a sector-wide level have proven most disappointing.
• Different components of natural resources management are managed by different
institutions and governed by different legislation. There is a need to establish a
mechanism or framework for inter-sectoral coordination and cooperation on matters
related to desertification at programme and operational levels. The National Envi-
ronment Agency has achieved considerable progress in this field through establish-
ing a network of working group and task forces. Although coordination processes
proved to be lengthy and sometimes cumbersome, the overall result is positive. In-
formation sharing and conflict resolution at an early stage have been greatly im-
proved.
• The situation at the divisional and communal level is less favourable. An adequate
institutional structure for the implementation of the NAP is one that takes account of
the proposed Reform of the Local Government System and Decentralisation.
As regards legislation, different components of the natural resources are managed by
different institutions and governed by different legislation. The phenomenon of segre-
gated and often conflicting legislation is widespread. Progress in strengthening and
harmonising legislation is still limited to date, although a working group on environ-
mental legislation has been set in force.
The sector study on Institutional Framework concludes that an institutional strategy for
NAP must hinge on four main strategic objectives:
• Effective institutional structures and legal framework;
• Wider participation of the population;
• Adequate institutional capacity including human and financial resources; and,
• An effective monitoring mechanism.
In spite of past efforts, the outreach to the divisional and community level has been
insufficient and “decentralisation of action” must be the catch-word in NAP implementa-
tion. Sustainable arrangements at the level of local government institutions are there-
fore of pivotal importance.
The Divisional Coordinating Committee (DCC) plays a central role in implementing
decentralised initiatives in resource management. There is currently a DCC in each of
the five Administrative Divisions of the country.

--- Page 66 ---
66
Normally, the DCCs consist of representatives from area councils, local heads of gov-
ernment departments, and Non Governmental Organisations (NGOs) operating at the
Divisional level. Local interest groups are allowed to participate on an ad hoc basis
depending on the topic at hand. The chairman is elected and the Divisional Commis-
sioner acts as secretary. Sectoral sub-committees may be formed, varying in number
and scope from Division to Division.
The sector study strongly advocates linking NAP implementation to the present local
government reform initiative, which is being planned within the framework of the Re-
form of the Local Government System and Decentralisation Programme. These initia-
tives recognise the need for local communities to be involved in the national socio-
economic development process and be empowered to make their own decisions on
matters pertaining to their development. This requires a radical change in the role of
government functions and powers. However, it will certainly take time for Government
to adjust to its new role as “facilitator of democratic governance”.
The constitution provides for an institutional framework comprising of the Councils
(City, Municipality and Divisions), the District Authorities, and the Village Authorities. It
is envisaged that development functions will be decentralised to the divisional, district
and village levels through the following structures:
• The Commissioner;
• Line Departments;
• The District Authority
• “Alkalolu” and the Council of Elders;
• Area Councils;
• Office of the Council;
• Ward Development Committees (WDCs);
• Village Development Committees (VDCs); and,
• Coordinating Mechanism: the Technical Advisory Committee (TAC), which cur-
rently exists as the Divisional Coordinating Committee.
All the structural elements proposed under the decentralised administrative system are
currently existing, with the exception of the Office of the Council, the WDCs and the
VDCs. The VDCs were formally established village based development institutions,
which will be accorded legal recognition as soon as the National Assembly passes the
Local Government Reform Legislation. The District Authority, “Alkalolu”, the Council of
Elders and the DCC are all legally established and recognised institutions.
Leadership for the key elements of the institutional framework (Councils, District Au-
thority and Village Authority) will be elected and the Department of State for Local
Government and Lands will be responsible for coordination and advocacy for these
local authorities. The enactment of the proposed comprehensive legislative framework
will repeal the different existing laws setting up the various structures.

--- Page 67 ---
67
The study arrives at the conclusion that the proposed institutional framework for the
implementation of NAP must take into account both the proposed Reform of the Local
Government System and Decentralisation Programme and the existing institutional
arrangements adopted for the elaboration of the NAP proposals. The structural ele-
ments of such a framework include:
On the national level:
• The National Environment Management Council,
• The Departments of State for Agriculture; Local Government and Lands, Fisheries
Natural Resources and the Environment and Trade, Industry and Employment,
• National Environment Agency and the Agriculture and Natural Resources Working
Group,
• Forestry Department as national focal point, in collaboration with NEA and the
• Department of Planning.
On the divisional level:
• Divisional Forestry Offices acting as Divisional NAP secretariats,
• Divisional Coordinating Committees,
• Agriculture, Natural Resources and Environment Sub-Committees.
On the local level:
• District Authorities,
• Ward Development Committees and Village Development Committees,
• Multi-Disciplinary Facilitation Teams.
Figure 5 depicts a schematic presentation of the proposed institutional framework for
the NAP implementation.
The study proposes to implement a number of institutional initiatives and capacity
building measures. They can be summarised as follows:
• Strengthening of existing institutional arrangements adopted for the implementation
of the National Action Programme to Combat Desertification,
• Strengthening of institutional capacities of agencies implementing the NAP,
• Strengthening of institutional capacities of Non Governmental Organisations in-
volved in implementing the NAP,
• Establishment of a National DesertificationTrust Fund, and,
• Strengthening of institutional capacities to monitor implementing of the NAP.

--- Page 68 ---
68
5.
National
Action
Programme
To
Combat
Desertification
/
The
Gambia
68
= Line of Command
NEMC
Dept. of State for Dept. of State for
Dept. of State for DoS for Fisheries,
Agriculture Local Government &
Health & Women Natural Resources & Lands
Affairs, & Education Environment
National Level
ISCD DSMU/DFOR
ANR Working
Group
DivisionalLevel
ANRE
WD ANRE NBD ANRE LRD ANRE Banjul TFB Kanifing TFB CRD ANRE URD
Sub-C
DCC Sub-C DCC Sub-C DCC Sub-C City Municipal DCC DCC
Council Council
NDSMU DDS/For
DDS/For
DDS/ DFor DDS/For DDS/For NDSMU
DDC MDFT DDC MDFT DDC MDFT DDC MDFT DDC MDFT DDC MDFT DDC MDFT
WDC VDC WDC VDC WDC VDC WDC WDC VDC WDC VDC WDC VDC
Local Level
Figure
5:
Proposed
Institutional
Framework
for
Implementation
of
the
NAP

--- Page 69 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 69
5. The National Action Programme to Combat Desertification in The
Gambia
The NAP was developed as a comprehensive and integrated initiative, which takes into
consideration existing national development goals and implementation principles as
well as UNCCD guidelines and principles. A series of action-oriented priorities were
identified which will serve as the foundation for all action in the next two-three years.
5.1 Development Goal
Implementing UNCCD is not undertaken in isolation, rather is part and parcel of three
major national policy objectives and initiatives, set by GOTG:
Government has introduced the The Gambia Incorporated . . .VISION 2020 develop-
ment program in which it commits itself to conserve and promote the rational use of the
nation's natural resources and environment for the benefit of present and future gen-
erations in a manner that is consistent with the overall goal of sustainable develop-
ment. At the core of VISION 2020 is a recognition that accelerated economic growth
will require increased investment and exploitation of the country’s natural resources. In
addition to new investment, however, sustained growth will also require successful in-
corporation of new technologies that are environmentally sound to increase productivity
particularly among resource-based establishments.
VISION 2020 is built on two fundamental assumptions:
• There is a need to consolidate and deepen the private sector-led economic devel-
opment programme, and
• As the level of private sector economic activity increases, so does the potential for
negative environmental impacts. The Gambia must continue to improve its capacity
to manage the environment and natural resources to meet this challenge.
VISION 2020 is in harmony with the Gambia Environment Action Plan (GEAP), as
well as the three post-Rio conventions The Gambia is a Party to. The GEAP is an um-
brella framework, which serves to avoid duplication and segregation in the implementa-
tion of the various national action programmes. The second phase of the GEAP (GEAP
II) has been prepared and is awaiting approval from the National Assembly.
At the centre of GEAP II is the commitment to ensure sustainable development by de-
veloping an effective and financially self-sustaining environmental management system
for The Gambia. Areas of particular interest to the GEAP II Program include agriculture
and livestock, natural resources, trade and investment, tourism and infrastructure,
waste management and coastal zone management.
The Government of The Gambia recently endorsed a medium-term Agricultural and
Natural Resources Sector Policy Objectives and Strategies for the period 2001 -

--- Page 70 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 70
2005. Paramount among the sector policy objectives ranks the achievement of national
food self-sufficiency, and security through the promotion of sustainably diversified food
production programmes. Recognising the need to link productivity and sustainability
marks a conceptual advance in formulating agricultural policy. This is very much in line
with spirit and objectives of UNCCD.
However, the immediate-term policy problem of the agriculture and natural resources
sector remains how to increase agricultural production while maintaining a rational ex-
ploitation of the natural resource base on a sustainable basis. This policy problem is
manifested in low farm income, growing rural poverty and household food insecurity,
accelerated rural-urban drift and rapid environmental degradation. The development of
the National Action Programme to Combat Desertification is a first step.
5.2 Guiding Principles
In addition to the national policy objectives mentioned above, NAP implementation is
guided by:
• The Convention to Combat Desertification,
• The Convention’s Regional Implementation Annex for Africa,
• The conclusions and deliberations of the three Conferences of the Parties to
UNCCD,
• The results of the two National Fora in The Gambia, and last but by no means
least,
• The aspirations and initiatives of the communities in The Gambia having contrib-
uted to the NAP process.
The Convention and Regional Implementation Annex reject the notion that UNCCD is
just another set of projects or a new funding line. Rather, both documents reiterate the
understanding of the international community that UNCCD provides a platform for re-
orienting national policies and making better use of available resources.
The Convention addresses technical, political, social, economic, and institutional
causes of desertification on equal terms. UNCCD implementation offers the opportunity
to foster self-help and policy dialogue at all national levels, to coordinate initiatives al-
ready in place and to rationalise the use of scarce financial resources. UNCCD calls for
the observance of the following principles:
• To apply a cross-sectoral approach,
• To rationalise and strengthen the resources already allocated for combating deser-
tification,
• To promote the use of existing financial mechanisms and arrangements,
• To build initiatives on already existing Environmental Action Plans - to be reviewed
and improved if required, and
• To encourage popular participation at all stages of the process.

--- Page 71 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 71
Taking stock of these principles and recognising the widening gap between require-
ments, available funds, and resources in The Gambia, the NAP has adopted the follow-
ing principles to guide NAP implementation:
• Mobilisation of local resources wherever possible,
• Strengthening of private sector involvement and responsibility as a priority,
• Consolidation and/or reorientation of on-going projects and programmes,
• Focus on proven measures and technologies,
• Emphasis on awareness-raising, informing the public and environmental education,
• Implementation of NAP and the National Action Plans under the Conventions of
Biodiversity and Climate Change in a coordinated manner along with the second
Gambia Environmental Action Plan (GEAP II),
• Sustained support to decentralisation and Local Government Reform,
• Enforcement of legal instruments already in place, notably Environmental Impact
Assessment and legislation of new laws (e.g. Forestry Legislation) as appropriate,
• Seeking further Donor support for priority interventions.
5.3 Implementation Approach
All too often, Action Plans and Programmes result in “shopping lists” with the underly-
ing purpose of the request being to bridge shortfalls in recurrent government expendi-
tures or to provide incentives to the implementing agencies. Being aware of this danger
and mindful of the fact that mobilisation of local resources will be crucial to the devel-
opment of a sustainable approach to combat desertification, the NAP firstly calls on all
national and international partners to avoid duplication of efforts and segregation of
planning and implementation in on-going and forthcoming interventions in the agri-
culture and natural resources sector.
Secondly, The Gambia can proudly announce that combating desertification does not
have to start from square one. The country has made visible and recognised progress
in reversing the trend of forest destruction and depletion of the nation’s vegetation
cover. Proven and accepted technologies are in place to serve the purpose of soil and
water conservation in the country. These achievements can easily serve as an entry
point and base for initiatives to come. Environmental legislation has provided useful
tools in addressing degradation of the land-based resources. Last but not least, there
are promising signs that enhancing family welfare through sensitisation and family
planning is gaining momentum.
Being a small country with limited resources, The Gambia thirdly realises the need to
manage the fragile resource base, mainly by carefully utilising available funding. It is for
this reason that it is advocated that implementation of all sector relevant initiatives are
concluded, first of all the three post-Rio Conventions, wherever possible.
Fourthly, Government clearly realises the need to set an example in its own camp. This
refers to adherence to environmental legislation and regulations, the dissemination of
policy objectives to the local government level and maintaining adequate budgetary
commitments to line agencies and local government. This is seen both as prerequisite

--- Page 72 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 72
and sign for the private sector to assume a more active role in resource management
and conservation.
Lastly, NAP does not envision creating new implementation structures or implementing
bodies. Responsibility for implementation should rest with the designated agencies or
organisations at the central or local level.
5.4 Ranking of Components
Action measures were first presented in the Draft NAP, subsequently updated, stream-
lined, and discussed during the Second National Forum. It is noted that initiatives that
were raised during the early phases of the NAP development process, but not selected
for the highest priority, should be reconsidered during the next review of the NAP.
5.4.1 Initiatives Identified in the Consultative Process
A wealth of proposals for action emerged during NAP consultations. All partners, local
communities and their organisations, NGOs, local and central government agencies,
members of the Donor community and the private sector actively contributed to the
process. Annex 1 to the Draft NAP, presented in February 2000, contained a series of
project sheets indicating objectives, main activities, time span, implementing agency
and, where possible, estimated costs and sources of funding. These proposals were
screened for feasibility and viability. On the basis of these project sheets and
preliminary sectoral consultations, a tentative investment plan, indicating strategy
objectives, issues and gaps, output targets, main actors, time frame and an indicative
budget was prepared in August 2000. Both documents were presented to the second
National Forum in order to establish priorities.
On this front, the next step is to re-assess and -evaluate the proposed activities, to
ensure efforts are not duplicative, financial requests are streamlined to mobilise
existing resources whenever possible, and activities are designed to result in efficient
use of human, financial, and material resources. This review process will be conducted
in early 2001 and will be presented as an Annex to the NAP.
Some of the proposals for action fall under the mandate of UNCBD or UNFCC. This is
not considered a conflict of interest, but rather an opportunity to build synergy, unify
approaches, and cut across sectoral boundaries.
5.4.2 Setting of Priorities
Priorities have to reflect a compromise between requirements, national objectives,
proven technologies and the availability of funds. Therefore, the second National Fo-
rum adopted a clear set of objectives for the formulation and elaboration of the National
Action Programme, namely:

--- Page 73 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 73
• Realistic approach in terms of financial requirements and scope of interventions,
• Building on achievements and proven technologies
• Action orientation,
• Community orientation, and
• Mobilisation of national resources.
There is a common understanding among all partners to NAP that implementation
should start in those fields where rapid and visible impacts can be expected and con-
sequently, funds can be mobilised within a reasonable period of time.
It is against this background that the Forum has recommended a three-pronged ap-
proach to implement NAP on the basis of priorities:
• Implementation of priority measures: In order to achieve immediate and visible
impact and to maintain momentum, the Forum calls on all partners to the process to
provide support for the implementation of immediate measures, built on proven
technologies and achievements.
• Intensifying pilot programmes related to land management in upland areas:
There is an urgent need to identify larger scale interventions in the priority areas of
conservation farming, agroforestry and range-management. The Forum calls on all
parties to address this task as soon as possible.
• Continuation of capacity building with communities and stakeholders: Dis-
semination of the NAP process has been insufficient to date and there is the need
to strengthen capacities at all levels.
5.5 Proposals for Action
During the Second National Forum, a wide range of proposals for action were consid-
ered. The following section describes the agreed upon priority measures.
5.5.1 Priority Measures
Having reviewed the sectoral studies and other relevant analyses, the Forum called on
all parties to the NAP process to give highest priority to the implementation of the fol-
lowing initiatives:
Forestry
The Government of The Gambia, the National Environmental Management Council,
and the Donor Community should declare the implementation of the Gambian Forest
Management Concept and the Community Forest Programme in all Divisions a national
priority.

--- Page 74 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 74
The National Forestry Action Plan, adopted in September 2000, has identified five pro-
ject profiles. From these profiles, the Forum recommends that first implementation pri-
ority be given to the “North Bank Natural Resource Management Project”, because
it is the most degraded Division in The Gambia and serves as the entry point of deserti-
fication in the country. The proposed programme aims at collaborative management of
natural resources and reducing the scarcity of forest products. Other projects of high
priority are the proposed “Collaborative Forest Management Project” and the “Gambian
Forestry Research Project”. A Mangrove Resource Inventory and elaboration of a
Mangrove Ecosystem Master Plan is also of high priority.
The Forum further stressed the need to promote afforestation with fast growing trees,
especially with those indigenous tree species disappearing at an alarming rate and to
give more consideration to aspects of commercialisation of forest products.
Wildlife Management
Introduction of collaborative wildlife management is closely related to community for-
estry and can build on the forest experience to a large extent. The National Biodiversity
Strategy and Action Plan has taken these requirements into account. The Forum called
on GOTG to urgently adopt the “National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan” as
a matter of first priority.
The Forum further stresses the need to include local communities in the planning, de-
sign and implementation of protected - areas management plans and to give emphasis
to a decentralised approach, i.e. establishment and management of protected areas in
the Divisions.
Furthermore, as any programmes in Forestry and Wildlife Management will likely inter-
sect with wildlife populations and forest resources in neighbouring Senegal, all efforts
must consider the need for trans-boundary management.
Livestock and Range Management
The Forum took note of the sectoral study and forthcoming developments in the sector,
notably the “Livestock Development Project”. High priority should be given to a “Sup-
port to Livestock Development and Rangeland Management Project” with the pur-
pose of establishing a comprehensive database to facilitate planning in the area of
rangeland management and livestock production. Activities would, inter alia, include
the conduct of a range resources inventory, identification of high-risk areas and partici-
patory land-use planning.
Agriculture, Soil and Water Conservation
Having reviewed the sectoral study as well as the Agriculture and Natural Resources
Strategy, the Forum identified three activities to be pursued with high priority under the
National Action Programme:

--- Page 75 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 75
• To address poor land-use practices and to check the trend of soil degradation.
Main activities would comprise of training of trainers in integrated land-use plan-
ning, community based land-use planning and land-use improvement plans at the
village level.
• To check severe upland erosion and related siltation in the lowlands. The pro-
gramme would be based on pilot activities along with the conduct of surveys.
• As a third priority, extension tools would be developed to address the issue of
inappropriate crop production practices.
The Forum further supports the request to rally support for staff training and staff de-
velopment.
Population and Social Dimensions
The Forum welcomed the initiatives to support integrated family planning under the
NAP. These initiatives should be seen as an integral part of the IEC – Information,
Education, and Communication approach. A comprehensive reproductive health
programme with four main components is required:
• Access to reproductive health and contraceptives,
• IEC on reproductive health, including maternal and child health, save motherhood,
sexually transmitted diseases,
• Extending “FANKANTA” to all Divisions of the country, and
• Youth development projects such as population/family life education, training in life
skills, sensitisation on sexually transmitted diseases and viable income generating
activities.
High importance must be attributed to activities controlling the spread of HIV/AIDS.
The Forum further welcomes the recent initiative of GOTG to introduce a comprehen-
sive Youth Policy and calls for participation of Governmental and Non-Governmental
Organisations concerned with youth development to actively participate in the Deserti-
fication Task Force.
Institutional Framework
The Forum identified four areas for intervention:
• Strengthen effective public participation in natural resource management
• Incorporate desertification concerns in existing laws and land management legisla-
tion
• Create an economic instrument for local funding of desertification control
• Improve monitoring capacity in environmental management
These activities would be addressed through an institutional support programme to
create an enabling environment for effective public participation in natural resources
management.

--- Page 76 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 76
The Forum called on Government of The Gambia to establish a “National Desertifica-
tion Trust Fund”. The Fund would contribute to finance community-based activities. In
addition, funds would be made available for public awareness campaigns and envi-
ronmental education. The Fund should be administered by a Board of Trustees. Con-
tributions of the private sector, friends of The Gambia and both national and interna-
tional agencies and NGOs would be the initial sources of funding.
Institutional capacity building for key stakeholders, especially at the divisional level, is
seen as another priority as well.
Appendix 1 presents a brief summary of the priority projects identified during the Fo-
rum. Building on preliminary project identification efforts, an exercise will be conducted
in early 2001, to finalise a detailed investment programme. The final draft will then be
vetted and reviewed by all key actors in the process to ensure a coherent, coordinated
and streamlined approach to project funding.
5.5.2 Information and Public Awareness
The Forum took note that information concerning land degradation, its causes, conse-
quences and remedial strategies is conceived as being inadequate by the stakeholders
at the local level. Moreover, there is a lack of feed-back as regards the process of im-
plementing UNCCD in The Gambia. First priority should therefore be given to dissemi-
nate the results and recommendations of the Second National Forum – particularly at
the grass roots level. The Forum further recommended to increase media presence
and to investigate possibilities to promote dissemination through leaflets and cultural
activities, e.g. music and drama. As a third step environmental education, both at the
formal and informal level, should be addressed.
5.5.3 Support of on-going Activities
Environmental Impact Assessment
Standardised Environmental Impact Assessment was introduced to The Gambia and is
gaining momentum. Guidelines, inter alia, for large agricultural projects, tourism devel-
opment and infrastructure have been established. What is needed now is to create
awareness among both public and private sector to provide a base for adherence.
GEAP II rightly stresses the need to ensure public sector compliance as a first priority
and entry point.
Conservation Farming / Soil and Water Management
The Forum called on all Government and development partners to LADEP to consider
a holistic approach in the programme’s second phase, i.e. to include components of
upland conservation. Full use should be made of the possibilities available under the
Rural Finance and Communities Initiatives Programme. There is an urgent need to
implement pilot programmes in upland conservation farming in order to establish
proven methods and technologies for wider dissemination.

--- Page 77 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 77
5.6 Institutional Arrangements
Institutional arrangements of NAP implementation are based on four clear principals:
• NAP does not envisage to create new or additional implementation structures.
• The Forestry Department should remain the focal point of NAP in The Gambia and
assume the functions of a National Secretariat of UNCCD.
• Implementation should be channelled through local government structures. This
commitment is also understood as support to the democratic reform process.
• Consultations at central level through the focal point shall continue. NEA with its
ANR working group and the Inter-Sectoral Committee on Desertification (ISCD),
proposed to replace the temporary Task Force on Desertification, will remain the
main partner.
5.6.1 Focal Point
The Forestry Department has been nominated as Focal Point for implementing
UNCCD. This decision takes into account that the Department spearheaded participa-
tory resource management and disposes of a field organisation reaching out to the
divisional and district level. At present, the Director oversees all UNCCD activities.
Whilst it is recommended that overall responsibility rest with the Director, capacity
needs to be increased in order to cope with the implementation of the Action Pro-
gramme. It is therefore recommended to make the services of a Programme Officer
available as soon as possible. The Second National Forum called on GOTG to make
its own provisions and, in view of current budget constraints, seek external funding for
a period of three years.
The Divisional Forest offices will further liase with DCCs and assume a co-ordinating
and advisory mandate at the implementation level.
Reporting on NAP implementation will continue to be the responsibility of the FD. This
includes reports to international partners and the UNCCD Secretariat, to national insti-
tutions and to a review meeting no later than two years after endorsement of NAP by
GOTG to review progress and to update NAP.
5.6.2 Consultations at the National Level
Consultations on NAP implementation at the national level are an ongoing activity. Pro-
cedures are well established and should be continued. The ANR Working Group will
remain the major coordinating body, taking into account that NAP implementation is
part and parcel of GEAP implementation, which is the responsibility of NEA.

--- Page 78 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 78
At present, the working group has delegated day-to-day consultations to the Desertifi-
cation Task Force. Following the recommendations of the Action Plan on Institutional
Framework, it is recommended to reshape the Task Force into an Inter-Sectoral Com-
mittee on Desertification in order to give it a more permanent status. Statutes of the
Committee still have to be worked out by the Focal Point and NEA.
Evaluation of the NAP progress should be conducted within the scope of a review
meeting no later than two years after endorsement of NAP by GOTG.
5.6.3 Implementation at the Divisional Level
Responsibility for NAP implementation will be transferred to the local government level.
What is now the DCC will become the main implementing body. It is recommended that
DCCs are empowered to propose, advise and screen / evaluate initiatives coming up
from villages and wards. MDFTs are expected to assume the role of connecting link
between communities and local government. Divisional FD staff is expected to act in
advisory function and channel reports, requests and proposals to the Focal Point and
vice versa.
DCCs would also be made responsible for administering funds. Provisions for “special
purpose budget lines” and trust funds within the Divisional Development Funds will
have to made in order to allow for proper auditing and budget control.
Detailed arrangements still have to be worked out by the Focal Point in consultations
with the heads of district authorities once local government legislation is enacted.
5.7 Financial Arrangements
With respect to financial arrangements, the NAP policy is simple and clear-cut:
• Emphasis is given to the mobilisation of local resources and to private sector initia-
tives.
• Moreover, there is a need to enlarge the operational possibilities of central and lo-
cal government authorities through generation of direct revenues,
• All possibilities to draw on international sources providing specific funds for imple-
mentation of UNCCD should be exploited
5.7.1 National Desertification Trust Fund
Private initiative and contributions from the private sector do not play a significant role
in nature conservation and management at present. However, against the background

--- Page 79 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 79
of foreseeable and continuing difficulties on the side of Government to mobilise addi-
tional budget allocations, such contributions have to be seen as main source of provid-
ing sustainable finance in the future. GEAP II arrives at similar conclusions.
There are two possibilities. One option would be to levy taxes or fees on environmen-
tally unfriendly activities or charge for “nature consumption” e.g. from the tourist indus-
try. Given the fragile situation of the Gambian economy in general and tourism in par-
ticular, such an option is not advocated. Hence remains a second option, to focus on
voluntary contributions as a starting point.
During the consultative process the idea has emerged to investigate possibilities to
create a National Trust Fund, initially based on donations and voluntary contributions.
An outline of structure, purposes and mechanisms of the proposed fund is provided in
Table 6.

--- Page 80 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 80
Table 6: Outline of National Trust Fund
Title National Desertification Trust Fund in The Gambia
Purpose To co-finance local initiatives of relevance to the implementation of the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification and inter-linking
initiatives of relevance to the Conventions of Climate Change and Bio-
logical Diversity
Initiatives Eligible Community- farm- and village forestry
for Funding (Exam- Communal / private woodlots
ples mentioned Communal wildlife management
during consulta- Nature tourism
tions) Promotion of energy saving devices and utilisation of renewable energy
sources
Public awareness raising campaigns
Environmental education
Private initiatives in protected areas
Coastal protection
Preservation and sustainable management of mangroves
Reproductive Health Initiatives
Possible Sources Voluntary contributions of Gambians and foreigners (e.g. visitors)
of Funding Voluntary contributions of enterprises with vested interests in nature
conservation (e.g. tourism industry)
Major enterprises based in The Gambia
“Friends of The Gambia” abroad /tax-deductible donations)
Donor Agencies
Government of The Gambia (e.g. debt for nature swaps etc.)
Donations at large
Organisational Board of Trustees with non-governmental majority of votes (private
Structure sector, NGOs, NEA, focal points of conventions, Donor agencies etc.)
Secretariat (CEO, treasurer, environmentalist, no more than 2 adminis-
trative staff)
Technical committee (in honorary capacity) to appraise and evaluate
applications
External auditors
Implementing Community Based Organisations (CBOs)
Bodies Non Government Organisations – also in advisory capacity to CBOs
Private initiatives
Local Government on contract base
Central governmental line agencies on contract base

--- Page 81 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 81
Table 6 (cont’d.): Outline of National Trust Fund in Support of Local Initiatives to
Preserve the Environment in The Gambia
Distribution of Maximum of 25% for overheads and administration
Funds 75% for physical investments / activities
Funding Full grants for catalytic activities (“seed money”), public relations and
Mechanisms environmental education
Partial grants of up to 75% for investments
Revolving funds and guarantees (collateral)
Funding Against substantiated application
Principles Beneficiaries contribute a minimum of 25% in cash or kind to invest-
ments
No advance payments
Payments in instalments against certification of progress
No funding of recurrent GOTG expenditures
No funding of training / capacity building for GOTG personnel
Public enterprises Eligible to apply if direct beneficiaries are communities
Remuneration of Against certificates of performance issued by independent body
GOTG services
Conditionalities Earmarking of funds for specific purposes and external audits / evalua-
tions are accepted
Legal Set-up To be determined, e.g. foundation
There are two options for utilising contributions to the Fund: Either to deposit donations
in an interest bearing bank account and to pay out accumulated interest only or to use
the capital. This decision is left to policy makers and consultations with institutions ex-
perienced in administering such funds (e.g. IUCN, GEF etc.) are recommended.
First investigations as to the acceptance of a National Desertification Trust Fund have
shown mixed reactions. There are widespread scepticism and doubts regarding ac-
countability and transparency. Reservation with respect to undue administrative costs
have been voiced as well. It is clear that if the Fund will succeed, focus has to be on
direct physical investments and transparent auditing procedures. “Hidden funding” of
recurrent Government expenditures has to be avoided by all means. The same is true
for training and capacity building measures. Although the need for such activities is
acknowledged, alternative sources of funding will have to be explored.
Obviously, the Trust Fund will have to operate independent of government but at the
same time has to involve government institutions.
NEA should investigate possibilities to incorporate contributors to the Fund into the
Environmental Award Scheme.

--- Page 82 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 82
Plough back mechanisms such as compensation for environmental damage and ser-
vice charges should not be utilised to support the Fund, since this may result in public
reservation. Such proceeds should be directed to sectoral revenue retention funds.
Details as to statute, disbursement procedures and regulations still need to be worked
out. The Forestry Department is requested to prepare a comprehensive proposal to
Cabinet within six months after formal approval of NAP by GOTG. Intensive consulta-
tions with organisations experienced in the management of Trust Funds and Technical
Assistance will be required.
5.7.2 Revenue Retention Schemes
The Forestry Department has pioneered the concept of revenue retention schemes.
Parts of the proceeds from licences, royalties and service charges are retained in the
National Forest Fund, which, within limits, is at the disposal of the Department for op-
erational purposes. Conservative estimates arrive at the conclusion that proceeds will
suffice to cover operation and maintenance in the long run once initial investments into
implementation of the GFMC will no longer be required. The Action Plan on Forest and
Wildlife Management provides details about structure and disbursement procedures.
A similar model is under consideration with DPWM and NEA has started to set up an
environmental fund as well.
NAP encourages initiatives to establish revenue retention funds. If government agen-
cies assume the new role of service providers, there is a clear need that, firstly charges
for such services be raised and secondly be ploughed back to the respective institu-
tions.
The Forestry Department should advise on modalities and procedures and assist the
respective agencies in the initial phase.
Local government is entitled to retain a percentage of certain taxes and levies, e.g.
livestock taxes. Earmarking of these proceeds for sector-specific purposes requires
attention and should be an issue to be dealt with in NAP implementation.
5.7.3 International Funding Lines
At present, the bulk of operational expenditures for conservation and sustainable man-
agement of natural resources in The Gambia is been provided by bilateral aid and
through assistance of international financing agencies. Longstanding partnerships, es-
pecially with the Federal Republic of Germany, the European Union, the World Bank,
UNDP, IFAD, AfDB and FAO have been established. It is envisaged that these part-

--- Page 83 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 83
ners will continue to extend support to initiatives in natural resources management and
participate in Donor Consultations.
There are two lines of funding which specifically serve the purposes of supporting ac-
tivities related to the three post-Rio conventions. These are the Global Mechanism
(GM) and the Global Environment Facilities.
GM is the funding wing of the UNCCD Secretariat, being housed and administered by
IFAD. The mechanism is frequently used to finance catalytic activities and public rela-
tion campaigns. The Forum requested that the Focal Point call on GM and the UNCCD
Secretariat to contribute to disseminating NAP and the results of the Second National
Forum. COP 3 recently passed a number of decisions with a view to enlarge the finan-
cial range of GM. Again, the Focal Point is requested to secure support in order to fa-
cilitate the NAP process.
In addition to GM, IFAD operates both a lending and a non-lending programme. The
Fund has actively contributed to the establishments of National Desertification Funds.
Especially NGOs can benefit to a considerable degree from IFAD funding lines.
GEF supports projects in four focal areas:
• Conserving biodiversity (65% of funds at present),
• Saving energy and open up markets for renewable energy technologies,
• Addressing the degradation of open waters, lakes, wetlands, and rivers, and
• Assisting in phasing out the use of chemicals that deplete the ozone layer.
Of specific interest is the Operational Programme 1, which is devoted to arid and semi-
arid ecosystems.
Carbon sequestration has been an issue of growing interest to GEF and is becoming,
especially since the Expert Group Workshop in Dakar (1996), a major theme. COP 3
and GEF Secretariat reiterated the commitment to linkages between UNCCD and GEF
in the field of arresting land degradation, particularly desertification and deforestation.
The Focal Point is requested to explore funding possibilities for projects and pro-
grammes in The Gambia eligible for GEF funding:
• Implementation of the Gambia Forest Management Concept (carbon sequestra-
tion),
• Preparation of management plans for protected areas,
• Farm forestry initiatives.
There is also the possibility to fund rangeland rehabilitation projects under GEF.
In March 1999, a new GEF initiative: ”Land and Water Initiative for Africa’s Sustainable
Development” was launched. Under this initiative, it is proposed that land conservation

--- Page 84 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 84
and soil fertility enhancement as well as water resource management will be dealt with
in a comprehensive manner.
GEF has also launched a major new operational programme for integrated ecosystem
management that simultaneously addresses the cross-cutting issues of land degrada-
tion, watershed management, climate change and biodiversity.
GEF disposes of a voluntary fund which also provides catalytic financial and technical
assistance and can support enabling activities. There is a need for The Gambia to par-
ticipate more actively in implementation of the Global Environment Facilities (GEF).
UNDP / UNSO and CILSS have facilitated the NAP process in the past and the Second
National Forum called on all three institutions to further extend support.
UNSO could also play a role as facilitator for the mobilisation of financial resources and
in attracting new donors as well as in the presentation of the NAP and technical assis-
tance for the organisation of round table meetings. Mobilisation of local resources could
be stimulated by both the Focal Point in cooperation with UNDP. UNSO could also pro-
vide technical assistance to increase capacity at institutional level and to assist in the
formulation of a sound monitoring and evaluation mechanism.
5.8 Monitoring and Evaluation
Monitoring and evaluation of NAP implementation is a joint obligation of all parties to
the process. NAP will be monitored within the framework of the GEAP. The purpose of
the GEAP M&E Strategy is to provide on-going feedback to decision-makers, GEAP
implementing agencies and the Gambian public regarding the effectiveness of GEAP
activities and programmes so that improvements can be made and future plans incor-
porate lessons learnt from current experience. The objective of the strategy is to de-
velop a user-friendly monitoring and assessment system, presenting the relevant indi-
cators, appropriate measures, baseline, targets, assumptions, data sources and collec-
tion methods.
This strategy is based on the assumption that regular reviews will be conducted, which
will provide essential monitoring information to decision-makers and feedback to the
public at large. The data collection for these regular reviews would also be used to as-
sess environmental quality and trends. This type of assessment, referred to as a State
of The Environment Report, is to be carried out in The Gambia every five years, and
will provide a general overview of environmental conditions, highlighting outstanding
issues and provide a framework for guiding environmental management. Periodic for-
mal evaluations of individual programmes will also be carried out. Information collected
on a routine basis for monitoring purposes of individual programmes will facilitate effi-
cient and effective valuations of the GEAP process. In order to ensure that data pro-
vided through routine data collection are accurate, and more importantly, reflective of
the opinions and realities of local populations, periodic local level consultations are

--- Page 85 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 85
catered for in the strategy. The approach being used is characterised by the following
principles:
• Existing data sources are used to the extent possible;
• Established and accepted data collection techniques will be relied upon to the ex-
tent possible;
• Data are designed to fit into existing reporting structures and procedures;
• Indicators attempt to capture both process as well as physical impacts; and,
• Data sources are drawn from all aspects of Gambian society, including govern-
ment, non-governmental organisations (NGOs), rural communities, and the private
sector.
Equally important to what is contained in the M&E Strategy is how the Strategy is used.
The results obtained would contribute to:
• Routine progress reviews;
• A framework for questioning hypotheses about how to best conduct environ-
mental management in The Gambia;
• The development of subsequent phases of the GEAP;
• Analysis for the State of the Environment Report;
• Enhanced coordination efforts by identifying key actors and roles and responsi-
bilities for data collection;
• Periodic evaluations, and
• Inclusion in the Environmental Information System (EIS).
Certain components, e.g. the performance of the National Trust Fund will be monitored
by external auditors and through independent evaluations.
Monitoring of changes in vegetation cover is expected to be a major activity. Regu-
lar procurement and analyses of remotely sensed data will be required. Possibili-
ties for a regional initiative (e.g. CILSS) should be investigated.

--- Page 86 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 86
Appendix 1: NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMME
SUMMARY MATRIX OF PRIORITY MEASURES
1.0 Forestry and Wildlife Management
Gaps, Issues or Threats Strategy Actions Output Target Actors Time Frame
ormed Stake- Lead: FD
1.1 Deteriorating national 1.1.1 Define principles for forest 1.1.1.1 Sensitise and involve all stake- holders Others: DPWM, 2001
forest cover management planning for state, holders and interest groups on the need to DLS, DPPH, DAS,
community and private forests. maintain an adequate forest cover. NGOs, DCD, and
ANR Working
Group
Lead: FD
1.1.1.2 Define and establish acceptable Accepted guide- Others: NGOs, 2001
guidelines for private, community and co- lines for private, and ANR Working
managed state forests. community and co- Group
managed state
forests

--- Page 87 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 87
•
• 1.2.1.1 Campaign to increase
1.2 Rampant Bush Fires 1.2.1 Develop and implement new awareness and strengthen the capacity of Well informed civil Lead: FD 2001 – 2002
CBOs on bush fire management in col-
strategies for the prevention and laboration with other stakeholders society on the evils Others: DAS,
control of bush fires of bush fire DLS, DFS, CBOs,
NGOs
•
• 1.2.1.2 Sensitise local authorities to
enforce the forest legislation Local authority Lead: FD 2001 – 2002
involvement in Others: DAS,
enforcing forest DLS, DFS, CBOs,
legislation NGOs
1.3 Dwindling supply of 1.3.1 Ensure sustainable supply of 1.3.1.1 Increase number of forest re- Increased area of Lead: FD 2001 – 2010
forest products in the face forest products for urban and rural serves under controlled management efficiently managed Others: DAS,
of increasing demand population forest DLS, CBOs and
NGOs
1.3.1.2 Encourage private plantation Increased fuelwood Lead: FD 2001 – 2010
woodlot establishment supply Others: DLS, DAS
& NGOs
1.3.1.3 Promote agro-forestry and tree Increase number of Lead: FD 2001 – 2010
planting on non-forest areas, schools and trees Others: DAS,
public institutions. DLS, CBOs and
NGOs

--- Page 88 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 88
1.3.1.4 Develop and/or adopt effective Well developed Lead: NARI 2001 – 2006
silvi-culture treatments to improve produc- silvicultural prac- Others: FD, DAS,
tivity. tices DLS & NGOs
1.4 Low level of commu- 1.4.1 Promote effective participa- 1.4.1.1 Encourage the involvement of Increased forest Lead: FD 2001 - 2010
nity and private participa- tion of local communities and the communities and private individuals in area under com- Others: DCD,
tion in forest management private sector in forest resource state forest park management munity and private DAS, DPWM, DLS,
management management NGOs and CBO
1.4.1.2 Establish and implement an effec- Effective technol- Lead: FD
tive extension programme for community ogy transfer system Others: DCD, 2001 - 2010
and private forest owners and provide DAS, DPWM, DLS,
vernacular versions of the NAP as an NGOs and CBO
extension teaching material.
1.4.1.3 Delineate the respective respon- Clear role and Lead: FD 2001 – 2003
sibilities of FD and the communities in responsibilities for Others: DOP &
community-control state-forest scheme, FD and commun- CBOs
identify their respective rights and benefits ities and their res-
and train them in their management. pective rights and
obligations
1.5 Lack of effective 1.5.1 Develop effective manage- 1.5.1.1 Conduct mangrove resource Improved man- Lead: FD 2002-2004
management of Man- ment plan for Mangrove Ecosys- inventory agement of man- Others: DPWM,
grove Ecosystem tem grove ecosystem NEA, DFis, DAS,
DLS, Ports Auth

--- Page 89 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 89
1.5.1.2 Develop Mangrove Master Plan Clear management Lead: FD 2002-2004
plan Others: DPWM,
NEA, DFis, DAS,
DLS, Ports Auth
1.5.1.3 Create National Mangrove Com- Clearly defined Lead: FD 2002-2004
mittee management re- Others: DPWM,
sponsibilities NEA, DFis, DAS,
DLS, Ports Auth
1.6 Lack of a coherent 1.6.1 Review the proposed wildlife 1.6.1.1 Acquire appropriate expertise to Draft policy imple- Lead: DPWM 2001
and sufficient wildlife policy and legislation to develop review the proposed policy and legislation mentation guide- Others: NEA,
policy and legislation effective implementation tools and to formulate appropriate implementation lines DAS, DLS, FD,
trans-frontier boundary manage- guidelines and trans-frontier boundary NGOs & CBOs
ment strategies. management strategies.
Lead: DPWM
1.7 Poorly managed 1.7.1 Develop and implement 1.7.1.1 Develop protected area manage- Management plans Others: NEA, FD, 2001 – 2003
protected areas management plans for protected ment plans in consultation with the local DLS, DAS, CBOs &
areas communities NGOs

--- Page 90 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 90
2.0 Agriculture, Soil and Water Conservation
Gaps, Issues or Threats Strategy Actions Output Target Actors Time Frame
2.1 Poor land use prac- 2.1.1 Promote integrated land use 2.1.1.1 Conduct sensitisation and local MDFT and VDC Lead: DAS, DLS 2002 – 2007
tices planning in line with Land Use training workshops and courses for mem- members trained in and NEA
Regulations of 1995. bers of Multi-Disciplinary Facilitation integrated land-use Others: FD,
Teams (MDFT) and members of the Vil- planning DPWM, DPPH,
lage Development Committees (VDCs) NGOs and CBOs
starting with those divisions where deserti-
fication/land degradation is most pro-
nounced
2.2 Severe upland ero- 2.2.1 Promote soil and water 2.2.1.1 Conduct reconnaissance survey Soil maps and Lead: DAS/SWMU 2002 – 2010
sion and sediment-ation conservation techniques in both and followed by detailed soil studies i.e., recommended & NARI
in the lowlands the low lands and uplands to characterisation and land evaluation of conservation prac- Others: NEA,
reduce erosion and improve water sites where soil conservation is urgently tices. DPWM, FD, DLS
retention. required. and CBOs
2.2.1.2 Divert or slow down soil erosion Reduced erosion Lead: DAS/SWMU 2002 – 2010
from farms by planting trees and grass in and soil loss Others: NEA,
the upper reaches DPWM, FD, DLS
and CBOs
2.3 Inappropriate crop 2.3.1 Promote the use of sustain- 2.3.1.1 Develop and promote sustainable Sustainable crop Lead: DAS 2001 – 2010
production practices able crop production practices crop production techniques through low production tech- Others: DLS, FD,
strategies which enhance the productivity of input approaches such as green manure, niques developed NEA and NARI

--- Page 91 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 91
the soil and minimise soil degrada- organic manure, crop residues, animal
tion dung and compost waste at village level
2.4 Low human and 2.4.1 Strengthen the human 2.4.1.1 Carry out a training need assess- Training needs Lead: NEA and
institutional capacity for resources and institutional capac- ment of the various government depart- identified DPPH 2001 – 2005
land use planning ity of relevant departments to ments responsible for land use planning. Others: DLS,
undertake effective land use plan- DAS, FD, DPWM
ning, produce topographic maps, and DOLS
monitoring land use and control
inappropriate land use practices in
a more coordinated manner

--- Page 92 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 92
3.0 Livestock and Range Management
Gaps, Issues or Threats Strategy Actions Output Target Actors Time Frame
3.1 Poor planning data- 3.1.1 Establish a database for 3.1.1.1 Analyse density, vigor and Knowledge on the Lead: DLS/ITC 2001 – 2006
base effective livestock development biomass from satellite imagery (NDVI) carrying capacity of Others: NEA, FD,
planning and management available in the country. available pasture land DAS, NGOs,
CBOs, DWR,
DOLS and DPPH
3.1.1.2 Identify categories of range Information on the Lead: DLS/ITC 2001 – 2006
lands according to productive potential productive potentials Others: NEA, FD,
(range units), development needs within of various categories DAS, NGOs,
range units (water points, demarcation of rangelands CBOs, DWR,
of livestock routes), and specify appro- DOLS and DPPH
priate grazing pressures (seasons of
use, livestock species mix, designate
specific area if necessary).
3.2 Lack of suitable 3.2.1. Develop and promote 3.2.1.1 Develop extension packages Extension packages Lead: DLS/ITC 2004-2007
husbandry practices for appropriate extension package for for various intensities of livestock pro- for various intensities Others: NARI,
various classes of live- stratified livestock systems duction based on available data (see of livestock production DAS, and NGOs.
stock above 3.1.1). developed.

--- Page 93 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 93
3.2.1.2 Develop specific programme to Reduce biomass loss Lead: DLS, ITC 2004-2007
reduce indiscriminate burning of bio- through burning Others: NARI,
mass-extension, through primary DAS, and NGOs.
schools, radio and television pro-
grammes.
3.3 Low level of produc- 3.3.1 Encourage and promote 3.3.1.1 Improve Livestock Marketing Increased off-take Lead: DLS, ITC 2001-2003
tion of livestock enter- cautious intensification of livestock structure and facilities to increase off- from local herd. and DOP
prises enterprise take from the local herd. Others: DAS and
NARI
3.3.1.2 Promote feed and forage pro- Increased availability Lead: DLS, ITC 2001-2003
duction for late dry season feeding of late dry season and DOP
feed. Others: DAS and
NARI
3.3.1.3 Promote the increase of the Increase number of Lead: DLS, ITC 2001 – 2003
proportion of small ruminant in the small ruminants in the and DOP
national herd national herd Others: DAS and
NARI
3.4 Weak institutional 3.4.1 Review and build capacity of 3.4.1.1 Assess staffing training needs, Qualified and Lead: DLS 2001 - 2003
capacity for range man- the institution/unit responsible for train staff and provide technical facilities equipped staff Others: PMO,
agement range management. as appropriate. DOSFEA

--- Page 94 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 94
Lead: DLS
3.4.2 Formulate adequate range 3.4.2.1 Review policy issues and legis- Range management Others FD,DPWM, 2001 – 2003
policy and legislation lation in range resources management. policy DPPH, CBOs, ITC
implementation and NGOs
4.0 Population and Social Dimensions of Desertification
Gaps, Issues or Strategy Actions Output Target Actors Time Frame
Threats
4.1 Low level awareness 4.1.1 Strengthen and expand the 4.1.1.1 Expand the Fankanta Initiative Adoption of Fankanta Lead: DOSH- 2001-2010
of the Fankanta Initiative. population IEC programme on a approach stepwise in all the divisions Initiative countrywide SWWA
nation wide basis. via MDFT Others: GFPA,
IPPF, GGFPP/
GTZ, Women’s
Bureau, DSYSC,
DCC, MDFT and
PCS
4.2 Low domestics food 4.2.1 “Create an enabling envi- 4.2.1.1 Promote the intensification and Improved production Lead: DAS, 2001-2003
production and security. ronment to improve food security diversification of agricultural production. and productivity. Others: NARI, and
and promote better land hus- NGOs
bandry.”

--- Page 95 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 95
4.2.1.2 Strengthen marketing struc- Improve product Lead: DAS 2001-2003
tures for agricultural produce (ie lumo trans-frontier and Others: DLS,
markets). storage facilities/ DOP, and NGOs,
infrastructures private sector
4.2.1.3 Investigate into alternative Non-income generat- Lead: DOP 2001-2003
income opportunities in the rural areas ing activities. Others: DLS, DAS
(ie Eco-tourism). and NGOs.
4.2.1.4 Post-harvest technologies and Improved food secu- Lead: DOP 2001-2003
appropriate land and water manage- rity. Others: DLS, DAS
ment and NGOs.
4.3 Low output of women 4.3.1 Strengthen women’s contri- 4.3.1.1 Review existing laws to en- Update existing laws Lead: NEA 2001-2002
farmers. bution to food production and hance women’s reproductive health and and land tenure. Others: DOSJ,
development. rights. DSLGL&RA and
Women’s Bureau.
4.3.1.2 Improve women’s access to Improved access to Lead: NEA 2001-2004
gender appropriate technologies and production inputs by Others: Women’s
rural credits. women. Bureau, NGO and
DCC.
4.3.1.3 Capacitise women in productive Increased women’s Lead: DAS 2001-2004
ventures such as horticulture, rice income Others: Women’s
cultivation etc. Bureau and NGOs.

--- Page 96 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 96
4.3.1.4 Improve women’s participation Greater involvement Lead: DCC 2001-2004
at village, ward and divisional level. of women. Others: Women’s
Bureau and NGOs

--- Page 97 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 97
4 .3.1.5 Design programmes to promote I mproved status of L ead: DAS 2001- 2004
t4h.e4 .1s.t2a tu Ism opfr ogvierl sy, oyuothu npgaerrt icwipivaetsio na nadt dImispardovvaendt agyeodu th par- OLethaedr:: D CCW omen’s 2001-2002
ovitlhlaegr ed,i swaadrvda anntadg deidvi swioonmael nle. vels. wticoipmaetino.n in socio- BOuthreearsu:, anDdO NSGYOSsC
economic activities. and NGOs
4.4 Low output of youth in 4.4.1 Strengthen youth output 4.4.1.1 Analyse reasons for rural-urban Study Report Lead: DOSYSC 2001-2002
agriculture youth migration and urban-rural migra- Others: DAS, DOP
tion and Analyse labour availability and and NGOs
constraints in rural areas with respects
to age distribution.
4.4.1.3 Promote adoption of sustainable Improved IEC act- Lead: DAS 2001-2005
land use techniques among rural youths ivities in promoting Others: DOSYSC,
and develop new intention approaches youth participation in NGOs and DCC
to reach rural youth population. sustainable land use
techniques.
4.4.1.4 Create alternative employment Diversified income Lead: DOSYSC 2001-2002
opportunities for youth in rural area (eg. base. Others: DAS.
Ecotourism). DPWM and NGOs
4.5 Weak knowledge 4.5.1 Improve education and 4.5.1.1 Improve school enrolment ratio Increased girls’ en- Lead: DOSE 2001-2010
transfer system. knowledge transfer systems. with special attention to primary and rolment. Others: Gambia
secondary education of girls. College, NGOs and
DCC

--- Page 98 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 98
5.0 Institutional Framework
Gap, Issues & threats Strategy Actions Output Target Actors Time Frame
5.1 Lack of effective 5.1.1 Restructure and strengthen 5.1.1.1 Strengthen the Agricultural, Functional Agriculture Lead: DCC 2001-2002
public participation in existing institutional arrangements Natural Resources & Environment Natural Resources Others: All members
Natural Resource Man- adopted for the elaboration of the (ANRE) sub-committee under each and Environment of the ANRE sub-
agement. NAP, proposals to enhance inter- DCC to provide technical advice to the (ANRE) sub- committee
sectoral coordination and coopera- DCC and facilitate integrated desertifi- committee.
tion among the key institutions in cation control and drought mitigation
the four programme areas. planning and management approach to
the implementation of NAP.
5.1.1.2 Strengthen the Multi- Functional Multi- Lead: DCC 2001-2002
Disciplinary Facilitation Teams (MDFTs) Disciplinary Facilita- Others: ANRE sub-
under the ANRE sub-committee to tion Teams (MDFTs). committee; CBOs,
provide technical advise to their respec- Ward and Village
tive district, ward and village authorities authorities.
and facilitate integrated desertification
control and drought mitigation pro-
gramme planning and implementation.

--- Page 99 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 99
5.1.1.3 Organise regular MDFT pro- Minutes meetings and Lead: ANRE sub- 2001-2010
gramme implementation review and review workshop committee
coordination meetings and workshops. reports. Others: MDFT,
CBOs, Ward and
Village Authorities.
5.1.1.4 Involve women in the develop- Multiple use forest Lead: DPWM & FD 2001-2004
ment and implementation of community and projected area Others: DLS, DAS,
based projects. projects for women. NGOs, CBOs.
5.1.2 Facilitate the proper function- 5.1.2.1 Train DCCs, WDC, VDC, and Increased capacity of Lead: DCD 2001-2003
ing of DCC, WDCs and VDCs to MDFT in PRA techniques. DDCs, MDCs, VDCs, Others: DCC, ANRE
serve as a contact for MDFT, the and MDFTs sub-committee and
private, and other members of the CBOs
civil society to meet and discuss
issues related to desertification or 5.1.2.2 Equip the MDFTs with neces- Functionally equipped Lead: DCC 2001-2003
mitigation of drought. sary teaching aids, training equipment, MDFTs Others: DLS, DAS,
transport and techniques to be able to DPWM, FD,
train and assist the members of DCCs, DOSLGL&RA and
WDCs, VDCs and CBOs in actions to NGOs
combat desertification.
5.2.1 Review and main-
5.2 Lack of desertification 5.2.1.1 Adopt the proposed wildlife New wildlife policy Lead: DPWM 2001-2002
stream desertification
concern in existing laws policy and legislation which provide for and legislation Others: NEA, DLS,
considerations into rele-
and legal management vant existing sectoral broad-based participation of the popula- FD, and DAS
legislation legislation. tion in wildlife management and sus-
tainable use.

--- Page 100 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 100
5.2.1.2 Include provisions for desertifi- Enhanced legislative Lead: DOSLGL&RA 2001-2002
cation control and mitigating the effect framework. Others: NEA, DPWM,
of drought in the proposed legislative DLS, FD, and DAS.
framework for Reform of Local Govern-
ment system and Decentralisation
Programme.
5.2.1.3 Review the current land tenure Proposed streamlined Lead: DOSLGL&RA 2001-2002
system with a view to making it more land tenure system. Others: NEA,
conducive to adoption of better natural DPWM, DLS, DAS,
resource management practices. FD, and NGOs.
5.3 Lack of capacity of 5.3.1 Strengthen the capacity of 5.3.1.1 Help to enhance the capacity of Strengthened NGOs Lead: NEA 2001-2003
NGOs and CBOs to NGOs which will be involved in the local NGOs including training in: project Others: DAS, DLS,
effectively participate in implementation of the NAP and planning and management information FD, DPWM,
NAP activities Community Based Organizations management and other skills DOSLGL& RA
(CBOs) to enable them to play
more effective role in implementing
the NAP
5.4 Lack of an effective 5.4.1 Establish a National Deserti- 5.4.1.1 Create a National Desertifica- Institutional and legal Lead: FD 2001-2002
economic instrument to fication Trust Fund under the tion Trust Fund under the FD framework document Others: NEA, DLS,
support NAP activity Department of Forestry to support to establish NDTF DAS, DOSLGL&RA,
the implementation of the NAP DCCs

--- Page 101 ---
National Action Programme To Combat Desertification / The Gambia 101
5.4.1.2 Undertake local fund raising National fund raising
drives, including seeking private sector campaigns Lead Agency: NEA 2001-2002
funding from conservation – linked Others: FD, DLS,
business and industry, and in-kind DAS, DOSLG&L,
support DCCs and NGOs
Monitoring information Lead: FD 2001-2010
5.5 Weak monitoring 5.5.1 Develop and implement 5.5.1.1 Carry out monitoring of key on the causes of Others: NEA, FD,
capacity for environmental desertification monitoring within causes of natural resources degrada- resource degradation DAS, DLS, DOSLGL&
management the framework of the GEAP moni- tion and the effects of the NAP to im- RA and DPWM
toring and evaluation strategy prove the situation
GIS monitoring ca- Lead: FD 2001-2002
5.5.1.2 Provide training in GIS, moni- pacity Others: NEA
toring and impact assessment of deser-
tification
Criteria and indicator Lead: FD 2001-2002
5.5.1.3 Develop and apply criteria and of natural resource Others: NEA, DLS,
indicators of natural resource degrada- degradation DAS, DPWM and
tion including ecosystem, health, carry- DOSLGL&RA
ing capacities, disturbance tolerance
levels, erosion and other parameters