--- Page 1 ---
REPUBLIC OF SUDAN
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FORESTRY
NATIONAL DROUGHT AND DESERTIFICATION
CONTROL UNIT (NDDCU)
SUDAN NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMME (SNAP)
A FRAMEWORK FOR COMBATING DSESRTIFICATION IN SUDAN
IN THE CONTEXT OF THE UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION TO
COMBAT DESERTIFICATION
KHARTOUM – MARCH 2006
i

--- Page 2 ---
Preface
The NDDCU of the Sudan Government, with support from UNDP, has set up a
multidisciplinary team of experts (Task force) upon recommendation of the First
National Forum in 1995. The task force was to assess past experiences in
desertification in Sudan, identify problems of drought and desertification, analyze
the immediate and underlying causes and proposes priority actions and strategies
within the context of the UNCCD.
The task force (Annex 3) constituted by the NDDCU was to prepare the Sudan
NAP strategic planning document according to a designated term of reference.
UNDP has agreed to make available the services of an international consultant to
work with the team and assist in launching the initial activities of the NAP
process.
Meanwhile a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) was signed between the
Ministry of Agriculture (Sudan Government) and UNDP and accordingly a
mission from UNSO were commissioned to further strengthen the process and
its initial state of launching of NAP. This has added a welcoming new
dimension to the work.
The process was then made clear through the UNCCD secretariat guidelines
with the support of the international consultant and a bottom-up approach was
then used to conclude the SNAP. The process was culminated in the Second
Forum and the NAP was to be written.
The AOAD then agreed to support the process of editing the NAP. An Arabic
draft was then submitted to the UNCCD secretariat.
The Minister of Agriculture and Forests then located a committee to Review and
Prepare the SNAP. The committee agreed to write an English version taking into
account the guidelines of the UNCCD and including what is missed in the Arabic
version. The committee then used all reference material found and all
recommendations from the different workshops and forums and come up with
this version.
ii

--- Page 3 ---
Acknowledgement
The NDDCU would like to acknowledge the immense efforts of the Committee
to Review and Prepare the SNAP for their tireless effort for compiling this report.
The NDDCU also recognizes the contribution of the taskforce team in collecting
the data and preparing their genuine report which we used as abase for this
document. Also the NDDCU recognizes the contribution of the AOAD in
preparing the Arabic draft version of the SNAP in 2002. Furthermore, the
Committee guidance, directives, inputs and amendments at all stages of this work
has been commendable. In addition the NDDCU is highly defiantly appreciated
the tireless efforts of the editors for insuring some consistency and coherency to
this drat document. Thanks are also due to UNSO and UNDP for financing of
the SNAP. The NDDCU is indebted to the Agricultural and Animal Affairs of the
Sudan National Assembly, the FNC, and the Drylands Coordination Group
(DCG) for their facilitation of finalization of the SNAP.
iii

--- Page 4 ---
Acronyms and Abbreviations
ACORD Agency for Cooperation and Research in Development
AOAD Arab Organization for Agricultural Development
ARC Agricultural Research Corporation
CBD Convention on Biological Diversity
CBOs Community Based Organizations
DCG Dryland Coordination Group
DECARP Desert Encroachment Control And Rehabilitation
Programme
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nation
FNC Forests National Corporation
GEF Global Environment Facility
GDP Growth Domestic Product
HCCDDCP Higher Council for Coordinating Drought and
Desertification Control Programmes
HCENR Higher Council for Environment and Natural Resources
IPRSP Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
LWRC Lands and Water Research Centre
MDGs Millennium Development Goals
MOAF Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
NAP National Action Programme
NDF National Desertification Fund
NCCD National NGOs Coordinating Committee on Combating
Desertification
NCS National Comprehensive Strategy
NCSA National Capacity Building of Self Assessment in Sudan
to Manage Global Environmental Issues
NCR National Centre for Research
NDDCU National Drought and Desertification Control
Programmes Coordination Unit
NDDCCC National Drought and Desertification Control
Programmes Coordination Council
NGOs Non- Governmental Organizations
SCSNAP Sudanese Civil Society Network for Alleviation of
Poverty
SECS Sudanese Environment Conservation Society
SNAP Sudan National Action Programme
UN United Nations
iv

--- Page 5 ---
UNCCD United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification
UNDP United Nations Development Programme
UNESCO United Nations for Education, Science and Culture
Organization
UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change
UNSO United Nations Office for Combating Desertification
WB World Bank
WSDC Western Savanna Development Corporation
WSDP Western Savanna Development Project
WSSD World Summit for Sustainable Development
WSARP Western Sudan Agricultural Research Project
v

--- Page 6 ---
Executive Summary
The Sudan has collaborated with and contributed to the international efforts to
combat desertification. It is one of the first countries that signed the UNCCD
and assigned the NDDCU for the coordination of programmes to mitigate the
effects of drought and to combat desertification as a focal point.
As a first step a NAP should be prepared. The UNCCD outlined the basic
approach, principles and general features and contents of a model NAP. The
convention underlined the principle of integrating strategies for poverty
alleviation with progrmmes to combat desertification. It also emphasized those
socio-economic and demographic factors contributing to desertification.
This document provides background information on the present environment
and natural resources conditions. It covers climate, renewable natural
resources, energy, land use, biodiversity and national heritage. Attention has
also been drawn to the impacts of the frequent drought periods that inflicted
the country in recent decades on the socio-economic status of the population.
The main constraints, challenges and former efforts and policies to streamline
the optimum use of natural resources were also reviewed. Several national
strategies emphasize environmental issues, natural resources and sustained
development, but these are often sectoral, lack comprehensiveness and
totality.
Since the thirties of the last century, programmes to combat desertification and
its component projects and interventions were being launched in the Sudan
through technical and financial assistance (local and international) to improve
land resources, production systems, and protection of the environment. This
should enable the country to make full use of existing international
interventions in the different sectors e.g. GEF (Biodiversity and Climate
Change Conventions).
vi

--- Page 7 ---
Attention was also drawn to the institutional set up and to the large number of
the national, international organizations and NGOs involved in combating
desertification. Their programmes activities and interests are so diversified
and not particularly coordinated or effectively linked. This, of course,
weakens their role greatly.
Research in the area of combating desertification should be supported and
strengthened by appropriate actions through the formulation of a
comprehensive plan addressing the problem in a scientific manner. Similar
efforts should be extended to education and training to establish a viable
database.
Financial resources needed to implement SNAP must be sought outside
normal national budget which is often limited. In fact most efforts in the area
of combating desertification has been supplied by UN agencies. If this
situation is to continue projects related to SNAP must be well thought of and
presented in a sound and appropriate manner that makes them internationally
acceptable and highly saleable in the face of a strong regional competition.
Therefore, the establishment of a NDF is paramount importance if
desertification is to be checked in any way.
Finally the document focuses on actions in the form of programmes and
projects within the context of SNAP and in accordance with the objective of
the UNCCD. These projects can be based on guidelines from the NCS and the
Agricultural Sector Strategy (2002-2027). Needless to say that these projects
have been drawn from proposals submitted by the thirteen affected states
based on relevant studies and workshops recommendations. They present
broad ideas that can later on be detailed to form draft documents that can be
presented for funding.
Since the NDDCU will be entrusted to carry out this tremendous task, its
present situation must be seriously considered and strong backing becomes a
necessity.
vii

--- Page 8 ---
Contents
No. Content Page
Preface I
Acknowledgement II
Acronyms and abbreviations III
Executive Summary V
Contents VII
Tables IX
Figures IX
1 CHAPTER ONE 1
1. Background 1
1.1. UNCCD Basic Approach 1
1. 2. NAP Process 2
1.2.1. Bottom-up Approach and Participation 2
1.2.2. Key Stakeholders and Partners in the NAP Process 2
1.2.3. Enabling Environment 2
1.2.4. Steps of Formulation 3
1.3. Environmental settings 5
1.3.1 Climate 5
1.3.2. Geology and Geomorphology 5
1.3.3. Natural Resources 6
Desert Zone 6
Semi-Desert Zone 6
Woodland Savanna 6
1.3.3.1. Soils 7
1.3.3.2. Water Resources 8
Rainfall 8
Nile water 9
Seasonal Surface Non-Nile Waters 9
Underground Water 10
1.3.3.3. Forests 10
1.3.3.4. Rangelands 10
1.3.4. Energy 11
1.3.5. Wild Life 11
1.3.6. Socio-Economic Aspects 12
2 CHAPTER TWO 14
2. Desertification in Sudan 14
2.1. Causes and Extent 14
viii

--- Page 9 ---
2.1.1. Overgrazing 14
2.1.2. Deforestation 14
2.1.3. Over-cultivation, Cultivation of Marginal Lands and 15
Irrational Use of Heavy Machinery.
2.1.4. Bush Removal and Unplanned Burning 15
2.2. Drought and Desertification Impacts 15
2.3. Land Degradation 15
2.4. Geographical Extent of Desertification in Sudan 16
2.5. Policies and Legislation 17
2.5.1 Polices 17
2.5.2. Legislation 18
2.6. Institutional Framework 18
2.6.1. National Drought and Desertification Control 18
Programmes Coordinating and Monitoring Unit
(NDDCU)
2.6.2. Agricultural Research Corporation (ARC) 19
2.6.3. National Centre for Research (NCR) 20
2.6.4. Desertification And Desert Cultivation Studies Institute 20
(DADCS)
2.6.5. The Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) 20
2.7. The Present status of Desertification in the Affected 21
States
2.7.1. Current plans for Combating Desertification 22
3 CHAPTER THREE 23
3. Past and Present Projects for Combating Desertification 23
3.1. Perspective 23
3.2. Restocking of Gum Arabic Desertification Control 23
Objectives 23
Activities 23
3.3. Integrated Resource Management for Desertification 24
Control Al-Odaya
Objectives 24
Activities 24
3.4 Western Savannah Development Project (WSDP) 24
Objectives 24
Activities 24
4 CHAPTER FOUR 26
4. Priority Programmes And Activities 26
4.1. Programmes And Activities Related to Institutional 26
Building, Coordination, Monitoring And Evaluation
ix

--- Page 10 ---
4.2. Programmes And Activities Related to Capacity 28
Building And Human Resources Development
4.3. Programmes And Activities Related to Priority 29
Programmes Areas at State Levels
4.4. Pilot Projects 29
4.5. Other Priorities Related to the Implementation of the 30
UNCCD
4.5.1. Mainstreaming of the NAP in the National Development 30
Strategy
4.5.2. Reform of Policies and Legislation 30
4.5.3. Establishment of the National Desertification Control 30
Fund (NDF)
4.5.4. Capacity Building 30
4.5.5. Awareness Raising and Partnerships 31
4.5.6. Priority Projects Areas 31
4.6. Traditional Knowledge 33
4.7. Research on Desertification in Sudan 33
References 35
Annexes
Annex N0. 1: Woody areas in Sudan 38
Annex No. 2: Selected States pilot projects 39
Annex No. 3: The Task force Team 52
Annex No. 4: The Committee to review and prepare the 53
NAP
Annex No. 5: Funds allocated from the UN Agencies 54
Tables
No. Table Page
1 Areas at Risk to Drought between Lat. 10-18 N 17
Figures
No. Figure Page
1 Organization Structure of the HCCDDCP 27
x

--- Page 11 ---
CHAPTER ONE
1. Background
Sudan is the largest (2.5 million km2) and most seriously affected country by
desertification in Africa. The arid and semi-arid lands cover an area of 1.78
million km2, which represents about 72% of the total area of the country. These
large-scale arid lands prompted the elaboration of a National Action Programme
(NAP) state-wise i.e. a plan for each affected state. Sudan has been severely
affected by recurrent drought spells (1973/74-1984/85). Sudan is a poor county
and there is a need for significant amount of external assistance to achieve the
national development objectives. The convention underlined the principle of
integrating strategies for poverty alleviation programmes and projects through
efforts of combating desertification. The civil war in the south of Sudan has
created very difficult socio-economic conditions and caused internal and regional
migrations and displacement of people from war-affected areas.
The population in the rural areas relies heavily on natural resources for
subsistence (cultivation of marginal lands, reliance on wood-fuel, range lands
…etc) and thus the consequence is serious land degradation.
Sudan suffers from serious brain drain that has impacted negatively on
technological base, scientific know-how, technical and educational capacity,
leading to substantial capacity building requirements.
Sudan implemented several development projects, some of which are relevant to
combating Desertification. The county should capitalize and build on existing
relevant successful projects, and make provisions for the new features presented
by United Nations Convention to combat Desertification (UNCCD) to make the
projects sustainable.
Sudan should make full use of existing international interventions and synergies
between relevant core conventions such as the Convention on Biological
Diversity (CBD) and United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC).
1.1. UNCCD Basic Approach
In compliance with and in pursuit of Articles 8, 9 and 10 of UNCCD, Sudan
as an affected African country has prepared its National Action Program
(NAP). As a prerequisite to the NAP preparation, extensive process of
consultation among local communities, administrative bodies, governmental
bodies and non-government organizations was carried out. The NAP
attempted to identify and analyze the constraints and gaps that are affecting
the progress towards combating desertification which eventually hampering
sustainable development in the country.
1

--- Page 12 ---
The UNCCD calls for the effective participation of local populations and
communities both in the national dialogue and in the design and implementation
of programmes and projects in order to guarantee positive impacts on the
livelihoods of affected populations and communities.
As conceived in the UNCCD, the NAP is process oriented, bottom-up,
iterative and decentralized. Through it a set of integrated measures was
identified.
1. 2. NAP Process
1.2.1. Bottom-up Approach and Participation
One of the major reasons for the failure of the past efforts to combat
desertification was the top-down approach used and lack of commitment and
participation of the local populations and communities. It is now believed that,
from several projects and programmes implemented in the field of combating
desertification, the effective involvement and participation of local
communities concerned with these programmes is vital and guarantees a
meaningful impact on the livelihoods of the affected populations.
1.2.2. Key Stakeholders and Partners in the NAP Process
Partnership is needed at the national level to facilitate effective use of
resources for combating desertification and the mitigation of drought.
The three main categories of stakeholders involved at the national level are:
A- Government and its various entities.
B- Natural resources users and other civil society sectors and NGOs.
C- External partners consisting of developed country parties, United Nations
(UN) agencies, non-governmental organizations (NGOs), multilateral and
regional financial institutions.
1.2.3. Enabling Environment
Prior to the UNCCD, fortunately, Sudan has already established the National
Drought and Desertification Control Unit (NDDCU) in 1978 and the National
Drought and Desertification Control Coordinating Council (NDDCCC) in
1991. Both the NDDCU and the NDDCCC were occupied in coordination and
working as focal point for desertification projects and external donors. Also
Sudan is already decentralized and divided into twenty-six states and more
than sixty provinces and localities. All these institutional arrangements and the
establishment of the Higher Council for Environment and Natural Resources
(HCENR) in 1991 in addition to the activation of the Environment Protection
2

--- Page 13 ---
Act have created a conducive atmosphere and an environment contributing to
implementing the UNCCD.
1.2.4. Steps of Formulation
Soon after the UNCCD entered into force, Sudan started the implementation
of the convention by developing the SNAP with the assistance of UNDP. The
process started by engaging a committee of six national consultants in
compiling and collecting basic information to help in the SNAP preparation.
National experts visited the affected states undertaking, among others, the
following tasks:
A- Raising awareness about the convention among local communities;
B- Surveying the affected states to gather information that is related to the
SNAP process.
C- Identifying the factors contributing to desertification and practical
measures necessary to combat it and mitigate the effect of drought.
D- Preparing the communities and civil society organizations in the states for
near future consultation meetings.
UNSO has also provided extra financial support for the completion of the
SNAP.
The process commenced by workshops involving national partners and local
communities’ leaders. State-based workshops were convened in the thirteen
affected states. Concerned Ministries of Agriculture at these states were the
focal points. Experts from the same states prepared papers and some
government officials initiated the comments and discussions revolved around
three subjects:
The state priority programmes in combating desertification and i-
mitigating the effect of drought.
The previous experience of each in combating desertification and ii-
mitigating drought effects.
Identification of the roles of different stakeholders in combating iii-
desertification.
The participants involved were 67% from local communities and 33% from
government institutions and NGOs.
These workshops were planned and coordinated by a steering committee
formulated by the NDDCU. The main task of this committee was to assess and
monitor the implementation taking into consideration the best approaches to
ensure dialogue, negotiation, debate and constituency among and across
sectors and institutions. The committee had put guidelines for writing the
3

--- Page 14 ---
papers and programmes on the priority concerns that were addressed and
discussed in these workshops.
The second phase of the programme focused on convening specialized
workshops at the federal level under a major theme; towards a Unified
Strategy for Implementation of the National Action Programme for Drought
and Desertification Control. Accordingly, national experts relating to social
and economic development and environment conservation prepared ten
working papers. The papers covered topics linked to the programme such as
resource mobilization, roles of decision makers and NGOs in combating
desertification. The programme has offered ideal chances to partners to
participate in designation of opinions regarding the preparation necessary for
implementing projects produced by the participants.
The participants of these workshops represented decision-makers, government
executives, NGOs, and financial sector. It was observed that decision-makers
have given more attention to these specialized workshops.
The third phase of the process was the National Forum. Participation in this
forum included representatives of all stakeholders in the affected states and
government officials. It was encouraging to see that partners from United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and United Nations Office for
Combating Desertification (UNSO) participated and made statements. More
pronounced was the auspex of the Vice President, and the presence of states’
Governors, and attendance of representatives from constitutional institutions
reflected the political commitment.
Papers presented have covered six main topics which included finance,
capacity building, indigenous knowledge, programme priorities, government
institutional structures, and monitoring and evaluation. It reflected what was
agreed upon in the past workshops. Group discussions took place in the
second, third, and fourth days of the forum.
Some of the lessons learnt from this experience can be summarized in the
following:
The problem of desertification is now brought out to wider circles and •
scope thus creating greater opportunity to increased awareness on the
problem.
Successful participation and cooperation between the government •
officials and NGOs is consolidated.
By closing the national forum, the important parts of the process were
convened. Recommendations of the workshops and the national forum were
collected, analyzed and a technical committee was formed to compile the
written part of the SNAP.
4

--- Page 15 ---
The Arab Organization for Agricultural Development (AOAD), in 2001,
through a request from the Minister of Agriculture recruited two national
consultants to write the SNAP document using the information collected from
the workshops and the national forum. The consultants compiled the SNAP in
2002 and it was submitted to the UNCCD Secretariat as a draft in Arabic
Language.
1.3. Environmental settings
1.3.1. Climate
The climate of the Sudan is predominantly tropical and continental. The
climatic zones range from the arid and semi arid in the north to the wet
monsoon in the extreme south. The rainfall ranges from less than 50 mm per
year in the north to more than 1200 mm per year in the southern parts of the
country. Rainfall is erratic and the annual variations are very high. The mean
minimum temperature range between 18oC to 21oC in winter while the mean
maximum temperature ranges between 42oC to 44oC in summer. The Red
Sea area and its highlands are dominated by Mediterranean climate. The
potential evapotranspiration is higher than the actual precipitation in most
parts of the country.
The country being part of the Sudano-Sahelian region, has been subjected to
recurrent droughts especially during the 1970s and the 1980s.
1.3.2. Geology and Geomorphology:
Sudan has boundaries with nine countries and enjoys more than 750 km of
coastline on the Red Sea. The geology reflects two different structural zones.
In the south and east there is the ancient Basement Complex Formation, which
has been uplifted and mostly covered by superficial deposits of continental
origin with Umm Ruwaba series occupying a basin upon it. Horizontal
sedimentary rocks resulting from marine incursions have overlain the northern
and western parts of the country. Sandstones and other tertiary rocks appear
on the surface as extensive outcrops, dipping very gently northward (Barbour,
1964). The combined action of gentle warping and faulting has produced the
Red Sea and its adjoining hills, while volcanic activities have produced Jebel
Marra. Volcanic lava occurs in many other areas.
The geological structures and geomorphic processes have given rise to a
topography which is generally flat, with a gentle northward slope. This
generally flat, low plain is dotted with a few highland areas, which mostly
occupy its fringes. The major highland areas include the Jebel Marra massif in
the west (3100 m), Mount Kingeti along the Sudan- Uganda border (3200 m)
and the Red Sea hills (2200- 2700 m). Of lower significance are the scattered
5

--- Page 16 ---
small rock masses the most prominent of which are the Nuba Mountains
which do not exceed 1450 m in elevation. The ironstone plateau occupies the
south- western part of the country, while sand sheets and fixed and mobile
sand dunes cover northern Sudan, particularly west of the Nile. Most of the
area of the country is below 500 m, while the valley of the Nile is less than
300 m above sea level .
The Nubian Sandstone Formation is the largest aquifer in Sudan with
sandstone containing non-flowing artesian water. In western Sudan, recharge
comes from Chad and Darfur highlands, while in the eastern part it is secured
by the Nile. South of Khartoum the soil is too clayey for significant
infiltration. Umm Ruwaba Formation contains a considerable storage of water
(Alic and Usmab, 1982).
As a result of ancient geological processes, erosion and deposition, 95% of the
Sudan’s total land surface has an elevation of between 300 to 1200m above
Sea Level, with almost half of the area below 500 m.
1.3.3. Natural Resources
The natural vegetation of the country is a result of the active interaction of
climatic, topographic, edaphic and economic factors. It increases in richness
from north to south, ranging from desert and semi-desert drought resisting,
scanty type of vegetation through woodland savanna in the low and high
rainfall areas to high savanna/semi-equatorial forests. The mountain types of
vegetation are confined to limited isolated sites.
Harrison and Jackson (1958) have distinguished the following three main
ecological zones:
• Desert Zone
It receives an annual rainfall of zero to 75 mm and is only used for short
periods by camels and sheep in good years of rainfall.
• The Semi-Desert Zone
This zone covers the northern parts of North Darfur, West Darfur and North
and West Kordofan, the northern limits of the White Nile, Gezira, Khartoum,
Gedarif, Kassala, Red Sea, River Nile and the Northern states. Annual rainfall
varies from 75-300 mm. The vegetation is valuable for grazing and its
distribution is more related to soil types rather than rainfall. The characteristic
dominant woody species are Acacia sp. While the dominant grass cover is
mainly annual with few perennials.
• Woodland Savanna
This is the largest ecological zone and it covers large expanses in Kordofan,
Darfur and the Blue Nile States. The annual rainfall varies from 300-800 mm.
6

--- Page 17 ---
Some valuable grazing areas are found in Southern Darfur and Kordofan
States.
This extensive ecological zone is divided into
1- The low rainfall woodland Savanna in which large areas is used for
cultivation and livestock production under nomadic pastoralism.
2- The high rainfall woodlands Savanna which occurs in the wetter parts
of the south on the slopes and terraces in an alluvial soil complex. The natural
vegetation forms are woodland savanna with shrubby undergrowth and sparse
grasses.
The Sudan is endowed with a wide range of ecosystems and Biodiversity. The
ecological range extends from the desert in the north to the rain forests in the
South. This is in addition to the fresh water and marine environments. There
are 12 orders of flowering plants out of the 13, which are available in Africa,
including a number of families, genera and species. Records indicate the
presence of 3132 species of flowering plants, 409 of those are endemic.
There are 265 species of mammals seven of which are endemic. The bird
species amount to 938, while the fresh water fish species are 106. Reptiles are
estimated to be 91 species, six of which are endemic. There are three endemic
amphibian species.
1.3.3.1. Soils
The Sudan sits on the Basement rocks of the African continent. It is overlain
by the Nubian Sandstone formation in the centre and north-west and by the
Umm Ruwaba formation in the south. The Basement rocks appear to the
surface in the eastern part of the country forming the Red Sea Hills. Soils of
the Sudan are products of these parent materials plus the alluvial deposits of
its rivers and their tributaries. According to the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nation (FAO, 1995), soil resources of the Sudan
can be divided into seven broad regions as follows:
Soils of the hyper-arid area (about 78 million ha) of Xerosol comprising part
of the Sahara Desert are superficial deposits of sand with bare rock debris,
shifting dunes; and consolidated dunes. Recent alluvium provides a basis for
productive agriculture in the narrow Nile valley north of Khartoum. Elsewhere
soils are sandy with little agricultural potential.
To the south of this region are the soils known locally as Goz and (gardud),
soils; classified as Arenosols (about 28 million ha in area). Further to the south
are 12 million ha of the more weathered Arenosols in the semi-arid climate of
western land central Sudan. These soils are low in nutrients and organic matter
7

--- Page 18 ---
and have a high sensitivity to erosion. The sands are free draining, with some
clay or ferruginous clay as a bond near the surface, making them firm after the
rains. Under high torrential rains their nutrients could be easily leached.
Vertisols (about 70 million ha) have considerable agricultural potential in the
semi-arid zone of the Sudan. They form the central clay plains extending
southwards to the eastern part of the flood plains. Special management
practices are required to secure sustained production of these Vertisols. Their
problems lie in the area of physical soil characteristics and water management,
while their assets are a rather high chemical fertility and their location in
extensive level plains where mechanical cultivation is possible. Ferrasols
(about 30 million ha) are the soils of the dry sub-humid and the moist sub-
humid zones embracing the tropical rain forest of the Sudan and the lush tall
grasses. These soils have good physical properties but are chemically poor.
Their low natural fertility and very low nutrient retention capacity are serious
limitations. Their great depth, high permeability and stable microstructure
make them less susceptible to erosion than many soils in the country, other
than the Vertisols.
The rocky soils of the Red Sea Hills and parts of Marra mountains, classified
as Leptosols, constitute about 18 million ha. The Red Sea Hills soils are
shallow and poor in nutrients and with high gravel content. The Marra
mountain soils are relatively rich volcanic soils. Because of the limited soils
depth and sloping terrain these soils are liable to erosion by water.
Cambisols are the smallest soil group in the Sudan (about 2 million ha), but
could be among the most productive soils in the country. These soils lie along
the undulating Ethiopian Highlands under dry and moist sub-humid
conditions, and thus are prone to water erosion.
1.3.3.2. Water Resources
Rainfall
Summer is the main rainy season, extending from May to October, with
precipitation ranging between less than 50 mm in the extreme north to more than
1200 mm in the extreme south. Rainfall, however, is characterized by significant
variations in distribution as well as in timing and location thereby magnifying the
risks of localized crop failure. To avert this risk, mechanized rainfed production
schemes have been spread over substantial area of central Sudan. Apart from
agriculture, the rains replenish the underground reserve and provide the scattered
8

--- Page 19 ---
(wadis) and water points with annual quantities to support the enormous wealth
of livestock and wildlife.
Nile water
Sudan is a meeting point of river tributaries that emanate from the Ethiopian
plateau and the region of the Great Lakes. The Blue Nile with its tributaries,
Dinder and Rahad, flows from the east annually providing some 54 md.c.m. The
Atbara tributary adds another 12 md.c.m. On the other hand, Bahr el Jebel
commences from Lake Victoria with permanent rains, but the greater part of the
runoff is lost in the swampy area known as (Sudd) in southern Sudan, bringing
only about 15 md.c.m. at Malakal. The Sobat River, which joins the White Nile
at Malakal, flows from the Ethiopian plateau and is fed from tributaries inside
and outside the Sudan. About 8 md.c.m. of its runoff (estimated at 13 md.c.m.)
are lost in the Sudd area of Sobat and Mashar. Almost all the water flow of Bahr
El Ghazal River (estimated at 14 md.c.m.) is lost in the Sudd area of Bahr El
Ghazal basin, leaving only half a md.c.m. to join the White Nile at Lake No.
The big variation in the Blue Nile and River Atbara flow between the high river
during the flood season and the low river during the months from March to May
has necessitated the construction of dams to store water for irrigation and for the
generation of hydroelectric power. At present, there are three dams: Sennar (1
md.c.m.), Roseires (3.4 md.cm.) and Khashm El Girba (1.3 md.c.m). However,
the accumulated silt in the dam lakes has reduced the storage capacity by 25% in
Roseires dam and by 40% in both Sennar and Khashm El Girba dams. Thus,
heightening the Roseries dam to increase the storage capacity to 7.3 md.c.m. and
constructing Siteit Dam across upper Atbara River to install additional storage
capacity for irrigation projects are being seriously considered by the Sudan
Government.
Sudan is now utilizing about 14.6 md.c.m. of its share of the Nile water for
irrigation, of which 9.5 md.c.m. are from the Blue Nile, 1.7 md.c.m. from River
Atbara, 1.8 md.c.m. from the White Nile and 1.6 md.c.m. from the River Nile.
The heightening of Roseries Dam and the construction of the new dams will
enable the country to fully utilize its share of the Nile water, which stands
currently at 20.5 md.c.m. at Sennar (18.5 md.c.m. at Aswan) according to the
Nile Water Agreement of 1959. During the early eighties, Sudan and Egypt
launched a joint project to excavate the Jongli canal and bypass part of the Sudd
region, thereby sparing some 4 md.c.m. to be divided equally between the two
countries. However, the project was hampered by the civil strife, which started in
1983.
9

--- Page 20 ---
Seasonal Surface Non-Nile Waters
These include El Gash seasonal river which has an annual runoff of 600 million
cubic meters (m.c.m.) and Khor Baraka with 500 m.c.m., in addition to about 40
smaller riverlets or wadis scattered all over the central plain, providing about 6.7
md.c.m., which are so far not utilized with the exception of about 0.16 md.c.m.
used for domestic purposes. This has been made possible by constructing 63
barrages across the wadis to store 130 m.c.m. and by digging 840 (hafirs) to store
about 26 m.c.m.
Underground Water
The water bearing rock strata comprise the Nubian Sandstone, the Um Ruwaba
Series and the basement complex which cover, respectively, 28.1%, 20.5% and
9.1% of the total area of the Sudan. The preliminary surveys of the underground
reserve quote the figure of nine md.c.m. However, there is need for more research
to ascertain the actual figures for the reserve and the replenishment rate. At
present, only about 1.3 md.c.m. underground reserves are utilized, of which about
0.45 md.c.m. are used for domestic purposes, while about 0.85 md.c.m. are used
to irrigate about 67,200 ha.
Almost all the drainage systems flow into the Nile system. The Blue and
White Niles, Bahr el-Ghazal and Bahr el-Arab perennial streams are fed by
natural reservoirs located beyond the Sudanese boundaries. Other streams,
including the Atbara and the Dinder and Rahad, which make appreciable
contribution in summer to the Nile, dry up into disconnected pools, or
disappear under their sandy beds during the dry season, or end up in inland
deltas. Other occasional, intermittent streams radiating from the highlands
during the rainy season, rarely if ever reach the Nile.
1.3.3.3. Forests
The forest resources of the Sudan cover approximately 47.3 million hectares
and are mostly woodland Savannas. Their distribution is such that 65% are in
the southern region whereas the remaining 35% are found in the northern
region (Annex N0. 1: Woody areas in Sudan)
Wood for fuel is the major forest product and Northern Sudan consumes about
13.13 million m3 annually (FAO, 1994).
Gum Arabic is also a major product and Sudan produces 80% of the world
production. Building materials, fencing and furniture are locally produced
from the forest resources.
1.3.3.4. Rangelands
10

--- Page 21 ---
The grazing resources as supplied by the natural rangelands cover about 116
million hectares. These spread to occupy the ecological zones that range from
the desert in the extreme north, where grazing areas are limited to semi-desert,
the rainfall Savanna and the high rainfall woodland Savanna in the south. The
northern rangelands are dominated by annual herbaceous plants with trees and
bushes. In the Southern portion, perennial herbaceous plants increase with
dense stands of woody cover.
Browse species (trees and shrubs) are important components of the natural
rangelands upon which livestock and wildlife depend during the dry season.
In the drier areas where Acacias predominate, the pods, fruits, twigs and
leaves are the main browse materials. In the wetter areas to the south where
broad-leafed woody plants are dominant, livestock depend heavily on tree
foliage.
Some range areas are under-utilized during the dry season because of water
shortage while others are overgrazed because of intensive water supply.
The expansion of agriculture in the mechanized and traditional sectors has
seriously reduced the grazing areas. A satisfactory balance must be found
before the situation gets out of hands.
1.3.4. Energy
Forests are the most important renewable source of energy in the Sudan. The
rural communities depend on forests, woodlands and vegetation for their
livelihood. Fuel wood, sawn wood, building materials and fodder are obtained
by direct picking from trees, felling or uprooting of standing trees. The total
annual removals from Sudan forests amounts to about 15 million cubic meters
of which 87% are consumed for fuel.
FNC estimates that about 30% of the quantities of wood are consumed in
Khartoum and Gezira states. It is also worth mentioning that 59% of wood
consumed is obtained from the low rainfall savannah and 39% from the poor
vegetation of the semi-desert region. The amount of wood removed annually
exceeds the allowable limit by about 5 million cubic meters.
The discovery of petroleum initiated the use of butane gas (Ghabat Gas) which
hopefully adds a glimpse of hope to stop to the present forests attrition and
recover an already lost asset.
1.3.5. Wildlife
It is generally accepted that wildlife was more abundant in northern Sudan
than it is today. Wildlife has been disappearing from several areas in northern
Sudan. The human and livestock populations are increasing creating more
demand on natural resources. Natural pastures are destroyed and very little is
done to keep human activities in harmony with the natural ecological balance.
11

--- Page 22 ---
The diversity in the ecological zones is reflected in a wide variety of wildlife
species. It has been reported that 91 genera and 224 species and sub-species
of mammals other than bats have been described in the Sudan. It is worth
mentioning that out of the thirteen-mammalian orders in Africa, twelve occur
in Sudan.
1.3.6. Socio-Economic Aspects
Population has grown from 10.26 million in 1956 to 25.6 million in 1993. At
present the country’s population is estimated at 31.7 million (WB, 2003) and
its annual growth rate has increased from 1.9% to 2.7%. According to the
fourth national census (1993) rural-to-urban migration has been steady and
high, with urban population growth of 4% between 1983/1993. The urban
population has grown from less than one million (854,000) in 1956 to 7.5
million in 1993. The rural population in 1993 constituted 71% of Sudanese,
(60% rural settlers and 11% nomads), whereas the urban population was 29%.
At present, the urban population is estimated at 37 % of the total population
(WB, 2003).
It is predicted that urban population will double every 26 years. This trend of
high rural-urban migration is due mainly to recurring droughts (which are
increasing in frequency), major civil conflicts, budget cuts, and declining
developmental investment in the rural areas.
According to the fourth national census (1993) population density per square
kilometer is estimated to be 10.2 persons. This figure, however, proves to be a
misleading indicator, when population distribution is considered. In Sudan, a
great deal of land is desert, desert-like, or simply non-arable. Therefore, when
land area is limited to that which has some potential arability (as done by
Modawi et al. 1995), measures of population density increase to 31.4
persons/km2, and go as high as 370 persons/km2 when considering land
presently cultivated. About 35% of the population resides adjacent to the Nile
in Khartoum, Gezira, Sennar, Blue Nile and the White Nile States. This is
mainly due to areas being uninhabitable, or becoming depopulated with the
shrinking nomadic population in the drought prone north, and the harsh desert
conditions from 12°N to 16°N. Overall, population density in relation to
arable land is 63 people per square kilometer, but the central region, adjacent
to the Nile valley, is most densely populated compared to traditional rainfed
areas.
Agriculture is the backbone of the national economy with about 80% of the
people engaged in crop and animal production. This makes millions of people
in the country directly dependent on natural resources for their livelihood and
employment.
12

--- Page 23 ---
This heavy dependence of Sudanese economy on natural resources is reflected
in the contribution of the agricultural sector of Sudan GDP, which amounted
to 29 to 46% during the period 1985 to 1997 and over 46% in 2001.
The share of industry, manufacturing and mining in the GDP is estimated at
15%, although the emergence of petroleum as Sudan’s primary export
commodity is likely to change the situation in the years to come.
13

--- Page 24 ---
CHAPTER TWO
2. Desertification in Sudan
Sudan with its large area and diversified ecosystems reflects different types of
land use. The intensive use of the available resources has led to the appearance
of the problem of desertification.
In Sudan, desertification is regarded as the first environmental threat that
poses a real constraint to achieving sustainable agricultural development.
Desertification is a human made problem through misuse and mal practices of
natural resources. Humans are thus the main agents of desertification as well
as its victims. Land degradation is invariably accompanied by degradation of
human well being and social prospects.
Climate with its great variation and intensity is the second causal agent of
desertification. The frequent severe drought that struck Sudan from 1967-73
and 1982-84, in addition to lesser severe drought in late eighties with their
great impact on the natural resource led to famine and human displacement.
2.1. Causes and Extent
2.1.1. Overgrazing
Overgrazing is the most prevalent cause of desertification in almost all over
Sudan. This is especially so around water points and where water table is often
lowered after increased or excessive use of water. Sudan with its rich livestock
is vulnerable to desertification through overgrazing. This has led to the
disappearance of some palatable species and replacement by non-palatable
types in some rangelands in Western Sudan. The carrying capacity of most of
the rangeland areas in Kordofan, Darfur and Butana can hardly support the
large number of livestock in the area.
2.1.2. Deforestation
Felling of trees for different reasons and the use of fuel wood energy are the
causes of deforestation leading to desertification in forest areas. Alternative
energy sources (solar, wind, biogas…etc) must be thought of if desertification
due to deforestation is to be controlled.
14

--- Page 25 ---
The use of butane gas as a substitute to biomass as a source of domestic
energy has significantly improved the situation in this respect. The recently
launched FNC Scheme (Ghabat gas) is really commendable.
2.1.3. Over-cultivation, Cultivation of Marginal Lands and Irrational Use
of Heavy Machinery.
The over-cultivation and cultivation of marginal land especially in low rainfall
areas is a serious cause of desertification in Sudan. This often causes: a) loss
of soil fertility b) soil impermeability and c) loss of nutrients and biological
activity.
2.1.4. Bush Removal and Unplanned Burning
The uprooting of bushes for wood and burning of grass and forest shrubs for
crop cultivation can lead to desertification. This is practiced in some areas in
Central Sudan. Fires destroy the soil cover leaving it bare and hence
vulnerable to erosion and desertification.
2.2. Drought and Desertification Impacts
Drought and desertification had threatened the irrigation sector, mechanized
crop production schemes and the traditional rain-fed agriculture. Moreover
desert encroachment is threatening almost all the potentially cultivable land in
the country. Large tracts of soils, even in the Gezira Scheme, have fallen out
of production due to desert encroachment. Similarly forestlands over the
country, especially the gum Arabic production belt in Kordofan are threatened
with desert encroachment to a very large extent with all consequences on the
country's economy. The major impacts of Desertification on natural resources
can be summed up in the following:-
Socio-economic livelihoods a.
Decline of land productivity. b.
Food production shortage. c.
Resource based Conflict d.
Decline in environmental quality. e.
Decline of rangelands and pastoral resources. f.
Shifting of sand dunes. g.
In N. Kordofan and N. Darfur sand is continuously heaping over fairly
productive soils. The entire strip of the Nile is subject to serious dune
15

--- Page 26 ---
encroachment, particularly the area between Delgo and Karima in northern
Sudan.
2.3. Land Degradation
Assessment of land degradation and its trends was based on the interaction of
the factors of climate, soil, vegetative cover and the current human activities.
Accordingly the concerned desertified states could be grouped into three
categories. The states within each of the three classes share some common
factors. The first class encompasses the most arid States, which are located in
the northern and northeastern zones of the Sudan. It includes the Northern, the
River Nile and Kassala States. Due to the relatively high aridity coupled with
excessive agricultural land use, the land is experiencing a serious state of
desertification. This stage has already been manifested in the form of bare
lands around villages and water points. Riverbank erosion (Haddam) and sand
dunes accumulation particularly in the western side of the Nile are all common
symptoms of deterioration.
The second class includes the states that are dominating the central clay plain
of the Sudan, as well as the main irrigation schemes. These are the States of
Gedarif, Sennar, Gezira and White Nile. This region enjoys a relatively high
annual rainfall (100 – 500mm) and hence moderately desertified.
The area had a fairly good vegetative cover but, currently the land has
undergone serious degradation as irrational mechanized farming, extensive
woodcutting and over-grazing are over mining land resources.
northern Gezira and the western part of the White Nile are now experiencing
progressive sand dune encroachment.
Class three includes the western Sudan States of North Kordofan, west
Kordofan, North Darfur and West Darfur. The soils are predominantly sandy
and due to their favorable permeability and workability the soils are being
extensively used for rain-fed traditional farming. These states are also the
main resort for the nomadic pastoralists who flee livestock pests and diseases
in the clays further south during the wet season. Consequently a multiple
factors of climate, soil and irrational land use have contributed greatly to the
current state of land degradation. But still the fact remains that prevention of
land degradation is more cost-effective than suffering the severe consequences
of desertification.
2.4. Geographical Extent of Desertification in Sudan
The desertified area in the country is confined to the mentioned ecological
zones which fall between latitude 10o-18o N.
16

--- Page 27 ---
Sudan is one of the Sudano-Sahelian countries that have been seriously
affected by drought and desertification since the late sixties to the present.
This has its lasting imprints on natural habitats, means of livelihood and socio-
economic fabric of the societies. The magnitude of desertification in Sudan
was assessed by assimilating the existing information through the use of
Geographical Information Systems (GIS). The indicators used were:
Land Use. •
Geomorphology. •
Human settlements. •
Soil and drainage pattern and •
Rainfall distribution. •
Accordingly five classes of desertification were identified: Very Severe,
Severe, Moderate, Slight and Very slight (Table 1).
The maps produced by NDDCU show rainfall fluctuations. The most striking
result is the shift of the rainfall isohyets during the period 1930 – 1990 from
north to south, indicating an increase of the area under more arid conditions.
The results in table (1), show that the area affected by desertification between
Lat. 10o – 18oN is approximately 1,260,000 km2, which is about 51% of the
country's total area.
Table (1) Areas at Risk to Drought between Lat. 10-18 N
Desertification Ecological Rainfall Area in % to Zone % to
Classes Zones (mm) (000Km2) Area Sudan
Area
Desert Desert 0-100 307 24.4 12.3
Very Severe- Semi-Desert 100-300 414 32.9 16.6
Severe
Moderate Low Rainfall 300-800 513 40.6 20.6
Savanna
Slight Montane 600-800 0.8 0.1 0.0
Vegetation
-Very slight Higher >800 25 2.0 1.0
Rainfall
Savanna
Total 1,260 100.0 49.5
Zone: 10o – 18oN,
Zone area = Studied affected Area (10o – 18o)
Source: E.M. Salih (1994).
17

--- Page 28 ---
Hence it is an urgent necessity to initiate operational programmes to control
desertification and mitigate drought particularly under severe and very severe
conditions.
2.5. Policies and Legislation
2.5.1. Polices
The main objectives of these policies are the achievement of food security,
appropriate use of natural resources and sustainable development, poverty
eradication, mitigation of drought effects and desertification control.
Sudan has sensed the problem of drought and desert encroachment since the late
sixties and prepared and implemented the Desert Encroachment Control And
Rehabilitation Programme (DECARP) in 1976, followed by the National
Comprehensive Strategy (1992-2002).
Recently the Sudan embarked on a 25-year strategy with similar objectives.
2.5.2. Legislation
Land tenure systems in Sudan are complicated and consequently their role for
optimum utilization of natural resources is confused and ineffective. Rules and
regulations protecting the environment as a whole available, but hardly needed to
activate these laws and regulations.
The Sudan government is about to set up relevant bodies for the well
management of natural resources to safeguard against tribal conflicts with
specific role for tribal leaders. At present laws be issued locally (Mahallia),
State (Wilaya) or Nationally.
The role of the HCENR in this respect is, of course, of paramount importance in
the area of coordination.
Institutional Framework 2.6.
In trying to review the organizations and institutes invariably all of them focus
strongly on the way that makes best use and management of natural resources.
Hence a clear and long term vision and in depth view of those strategies. It is
high time that such approach be the prime target for all those involved in
combating desertification. Needless to say that should have clear objectives,
holistic and well coordinated with others to ensure the best use of the already
strained financial resources.
In spite of the relatively large number of institutions, organization and NGOs
involved in combating desertification and the wide distribution of
18

--- Page 29 ---
responsibilities and tasks there is a pressing need to achieve complementarities
of activities and coordination efforts.
2.6.1. National Drought and Desertification Control Programmes
Coordinating and Monitoring Unit (NDDCU)
The Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (MOAF) is responsible for food
security and mandated to operationalize the national strategies, policies and
programmes. The Ministry has been the main entity to forecast disasters of
drought and desertification since the sixties.
Within its capacity and mandate the ministry has established the National
Desertification Control and Monitoring Unit in 1978, which has been supported
by United Nations Sudanosahelian Office (UNSO) (UNDP) in 1980. After the
workshop on Guidelines of the National Plan for Combating Drought and
desertification, the unit was upgraded to National Drought and Desertification
Control Programmes Coordinating and Monitoring Unit (NDDCU) and its
coordinating council was restructured to comprise the involved representatives
from the relative sectors.
NDDCU as an organ of information, synergy, dissemination and coordination,
and the Coordination Council (high level experts) are responsible for
formulating, and updating the approved national plans, programmes of action and
for articulating elements and issues of the drought and desertification problems.
They are mandated to modify the projects of priority according to actual
conditions and essential needs.
The present position of the National Drought and Desertification Control
Programmes Coordinating and Monitoring Unit (NDDCU) under the
Administration of Land Use and Desertification Control reflects an
insufficient understanding of the role and importance of the unit.
This position deprives the unit of autonomy and flexibility required to perform
its function at the national level. It is hence imperative to reconsider the status
of the unit within the context of enhancing the overall commitment of the
government to tackle the problem of desertification in the country.
2.6.2. Agricultural Research Corporation (ARC)
19

--- Page 30 ---
In the process of trying to solve agricultural production problems ARC has
humbly contributed to desertification control and research. Lands and
Water Research Centre (LWRC) is contributing to research on
desertification control through tackling programmes on land and water
management, cultural practices, rehabilitation of forests and agroforestry.
LWRC is also generating some useful data contributing to the
understanding of desertification phenomenon in the Sudan.
However, ARC in its ongoing programmes in the area of desertification in
Gezira, White Nile, Khartoum, and Northern States is executing the following
projects:
1- Assessment of some degraded soil series and soil research.
2- Soil sedimentation and soil crusting in wheat plots in Gezira.
3- Water harvesting techniques in Butana and Gedarif.
4- Salt-affected soils and use of organic agriculture in Khartoum and River Nile
States.
5- Reclamation of upper soil terraces in Southern Khartoum and Northern States
through:
Organic manure. •
Water leaching. •
Use of urea. •
Use of salt tolerant wheat varieties. •
6- Land and water management techniques in Gardud soils and cultural practices
for gum Arabic production in Kordofan.
2.6.3. National Centre for Research (NCR)
The National Centre for Research in its broad objectives and targets is clearly
set to:
Lay sound solid database for sustainable development, (cid:131)
Plan for scientific and technical state and the creation of an indusive (cid:131)
environment for scientific research; and
Fill up research gaps not covered by other research institutions. (cid:131)
NCR via the institute of environmental research and natural resources launching
an ambitious programme to combat desertification and mitigate its effects but, as
expected, was faced with tremendous difficulties during the execution phase. The
constraints are mainly financial resources and cadre. Nevertheless, the
programme managed to contribute significantly in the areas of:
Stabilization of sand dunes. (cid:131)
Effects of shelterbelts. (cid:131)
Use of sandy soils for agricultural and animal production. (cid:131)
20

--- Page 31 ---
2.6.4. Desertification And Desert Cultivation Studies Institute (DADCSI)
The institute is contributing significantly to desertification control knowledge
through their guided research and studies.
2.6.5. The Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs)
The role of NGOs need not be underscored and this is reflected in a few
examples:
The Sudanese Environment Conservation Society (SECS) could be classified
as a leading NGO conducting participatory process in support of
implementation of the SNAP related activities. SECS first strategy (1992–
2002) specified the desertification problem as the major environmental
problem in the Sudan. SECS housed the national NGOs Coordinating
Committee on Combating Desertification (NCCD). SECS acted as focal point
for a network of 100 branches located in more than 13 states. Also SECS had
been active in conducting workshops and meetings at Khartoum and in the
states where direct consultation and discussion on issues of SNAP related
activities were discussed. Also SECS in its headquarters office housed the
NGOs network for poverty alleviation. It should be added that the NCCD
NGOs network was not as active during the period 2002-2004 when compared
to 2000-2002, and that efforts to activate this network are being made.
The Sudanese Civil Society Network for Alleviation of Poverty (SCSNAP) (cid:131)
which was established by a group of NGOs in collaboration with the
Netherlands' Oxfam participated in the consultation of IPRSP. The network
conducted several meetings and workshops with emphasis on identifying
Community Based Organizations (CBOs) best practices in mitigating the
negative impact of poverty and work with other stakeholders towards
introducing or recommending pro-poor macro-policies.
During 2003 the FNC has put forth participatory efforts with CBOs to (cid:131)
establish 105 community forests in 10474 feddans during 2003. Also
Agency for Cooperation and Research in Development (ACORD) in the
Red Sea State distributed 1500 seedlings and rehabilitated 50 feddans of
rangeland. The SOS Sahel International (UK) established 14 community
forests associations in Northern Kordofan. The associations registered in
2002 were responsible for tree plantations in 7018 feddans in privately
owned land and in 85,000 feddans in communally managed land. It was
reported by SOS that community forestry had proved to be an effective
strategy in strengthening the livelihood resources base of 32,000 persons in
N. Kordofan.
21

--- Page 32 ---
2.7. The Present status of Desertification in the Affected States
The thirteen-affected states have tropical sub-continental type of climate
whose nature is determined by two main air movements. One is a very dry air
from the north that prevails throughout the year but not uniform. The second
is a major airflow of Maritime Origin that enters the area from the south and
carries moisture and brings rain. Accordingly there is a dry season from
November to April and a wet season from May through October. The rainfall
follows a general north-south gradient increase from 25 mm in the extreme
north to 1000 mm in the southern fringes. Thus the states that are located in
the southern part of the desertified area receive more annual rainfall than those
in the extreme north, and hence less vulnerable to desertification, except the
Northern State which is located in the desert.
Each of the eleven remaining states are situated in two or more of the desert,
semi-desert, arid and semi-arid climatic zones that follows consecutively from
north to south similar to the rainfall isohyets.
The annual rainfall is highly variable and the distribution is erratic with all
direct implications on the cropping season. Except in August, which is the
most humid month, the potential evapotranspiration in all other months
exceeds the relative humidity.
Assessment of land degradation and its trends was based on the interaction of
the factors of climate namely: soil, vegetative coverage and the current human
activities. Accordingly the concerned desertified states could be grouped into
three categories. The states within each of the three classes share some
common factors. The first class encompasses the most and states, which are
located in the northern and northeastern zones of the Sudan. It includes the
Northern, the River Nile and Kassala States. Due to the relatively high aridity
coupled with excessive agricultural land use, the land is experiencing a serious
impact of desertification. This state has already been manifested in the form
of bare lands around villages and water points. Riverbank erosion in the form
of bare lands around villages and water points. Riverbank erosion (Haddam)
and sand dunes accumulation particularly in the western side of the Nile are
all common symptoms of deteriorations.
The second class includes the states that are dominating the central clay plain
of the country as well as the main irrigation schemes. These are the States of
Gedarif, Sennar, Gezira and White Nile. This region enjoys a relatively high
annual rainfall (100-500 mm) and hence moderately desertified. The area had
a fairly good vegetative cover but, currently the land has undergone serious
degradation as irrational mechanized farming, extensive woodcutting and
over-grazing are over mining land resources.
22

--- Page 33 ---
Northern Gezira and the western part of the White Nile States are now
experiencing progressive sand dunes encroachment.
Class three includes the western Sudan States of North Kordofan, west
Kordofan, North Darfur and West Darfur. The soil is predominantly sandy and
due to their favorable permeability and workability the soils are being
extensively used for rain-fed traditional farming. This State is also the main
resort for the nomadic pastoralists who flee livestock pests and diseases in the
clays further south during the wet season. Consequently a multiple factors of
climate, soil and irrational land use have contributed greatly to the current
state of land degradation.
2.7.1. Current Plans for Combating Desertification
There are few national and externally supported projects for combating
desertification in most of the states but the effects are limited and localized
due to the large area affected and the vast degree of deterioration. Some of the
projects have already ceased to function due to lack of funds.
Therefore unless serious and immediate action is pursued the gap between the
sustainability of resources and the degree of exploitation will further widen.
CHAPTER THREE
3. Past and Present Projects for Combating Desertification
3.1. Perspective
About a quarter of a century back, the Rural Development Administration
implemented several agricultural development projects in Sudan over a wide
range of a climatic and soil conditions. Some of these projects were designed for
combating what was referred to as Desert Encroachment Control And
Rehabilitation Programme (DECARP, 1976). It was realized then that this
phenomenon is triggered by human and livestock activities including,
overgrazing, irrational cultivation, wood cutting and deforestation, uprooting
shrubs for fuel, the lowering of water tables due to increased water use, and
burning of grasslands forests and shrub lands. Some sort of action programmes
supported these activities.
The obvious hypothesis was that man and livestock are behind desertification.
Hence appropriate projects to combat: overgrazing, marginal cultivation, wood
23

--- Page 34 ---
cutting and deforestation, lowering of the water table and burning of grasslands
(Harig) were implemented as priority action programmes.
More, recently, several anti-desertification projects were set up, of which the
following will be evaluated.
3.2. Restocking of Gum Arabic Desertification Control
Objectives
The main objectives of the project are to establish ten extension service centers in
three districts of northern Kordofan (Al Obied, Um Ruaba and Bara) and to
promote individual and community involvement in the restocking of the gum
belt. By so doing it is aimed to create facilities and a level of technical ability
within the rural communities to enable them to become self reliant in combating
desertification and in improving their living standards.
Activities
The activities include establishment of extension centres to mobilize community
in restocking of the gum belt. Establishment of central nurseries. Distribution of
seedlings to the farmers (Acacia Senegal, Acacia Trotilis, and Acacia Balamites).
3.3. Integrated Resource Management for Desertification Control (Al-Odaya)
Objectives
The aim of the project is to establish institutional structure to promote individual
and community involvement for the regeneration, conservation and proper
management of the natural resources in their area. The Immediate Objectives are:
- Creation of self-reliant rural communities through establishing operational
Village Councils Development Committees (VCDCs) with their
subcommittees that focuses on the natural resource management.
- Improvement of land management with emphasis on range management, and
- Development of water harvesting techniques.
Activities
- Consolidation of eleven operational VCDCs and formation of new ones.
- Creation of nomadic development committees. .
- Creation of a Council for Area Resources Management (CARM).
24

--- Page 35 ---
- Establishment of specialized sub-committees on range, water, finance and
village nurseries.
- Provision of on-job training for village during participation in project
activities.
3.4. Western Savanna Development Project (WSDP)
This project has formed an integrated part of government long-term agricultural
and rural development programme in Southern Darfur.
The Western Savanna Development Corporation (WSDC) became operative in
1978 and had two projects, namely South Darfur Rural Development Project and
The Savanna Development Project.
Objectives
- Increasing small farmer incomes through higher production.
- Adoption of farming system.
- Arresting the ongoing land degradation.
- Rehabilitation of water supplies facilities.
- Extension of new technologies.
- Conservation of rangelands and pastures.
Activities
- Adoption of operational research and establishment of four controlled
settlements with secure tenure.
- Initiation of the registered deferred wet season enclosures.
- A programme of rotational deferred wet season grazing system was
implemented with a group of nomads
- The WSDC worked closely with the National Water Corporation (NWC) to
rehabilitate water yards.
The Western Sudan Agricultural Research Project (WSARP) as an integral part
of WSDC was supposed to generate new farming systems, crop varieties,
introduce tillage implements, improve crop production and protect the
environment. However, numerous problems and constraints interacted and
limited its success to few technological packages.
Each project achieved some of its objectives, for example:
Establishment of nursery techniques and restocking of gum Arabic -
gardens.
Techology of rest-rotation grazing system WSARP. -
Concept of traditional reserves and water catchment techniques (Al -
Odaya).
Establishment of an extension system WSARP. -
25

--- Page 36 ---
Trials and partial success in the establishment of a new farming system -
and a sustainable environment WSARP.
Almost all three projects were limited by one or more of the following:
Lack of efficient public awareness and popular participation mechanisms. -
Lack of adequate community services in the project areas. -
Some of the projects are heavily sector oriented, with slow cash flow -
process.
Lack of trained manpower in the field. -
Almost all three projects lack an effective assessment and monitoring -
evaluation system, with coordination at minimum.
Other projects were designed to conserve the forest resources by providing
energy substitute for use by households and services. Such projects included: the
project of briquetting of groundnut shells and improved-strata dissemination at Al
Nuhoud and the project of charcoal production from cotton stalks in the
agriculture schemes of AlRahad, Gezira and biogas plants in Darfur State.
Mobile or shifting sand dunes blockade watercourses cover productive lands, rail,
roads and building. A notable successful project for sand dunes stabilization was
N). The iْmplemented near Al-Bashiri village, 18Km northwest of Bara (L14
method included fencing, establishment of chess board designed fences using
local bush and planting of drought resistant grasses such are: Panicum turgidum
and Leptadenia pyrotechnica shrubs, which are available in the area proved the
best for making microfences.
CHAPTER FOUR
4. Priority Programmes and Activities
These priorities are based on previous work and documents. Paramount among
these, are the workshops carried out by the NDDCU in partnership with the
NCCD in the 13 most affected states and the subsequent national workshops.
They are also based on the parallel efforts of the NCCD which culminated in a
national workshop and the recent work on the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs), especially Goal “7” which calls for ensuring environmental
sustainability. The programmes were prepared and identified in conformity with
the spirit of Chapter 12 Agenda 21.
The programmes can be classified into four main programme types:
Programmes and activities related to institutional building for •
coordination, monitoring and evaluation.
Programmes and activities related to capacity building and human •
resources development.
26

--- Page 37 ---
Programmes and activities related to priority programme areas at state •
levels.
Other priorities related to the implementation of the UNCCD. •
Pilot projects. •
4.1. Programmes And Activities Related to Institutional Building,
Coordination, Monitoring And Evaluation
It is recommended that a Higher Council for Coordinating Drought and
Desertification Control Programmes (HCCDDCP) and its organs should be
established. This council is to be enabled to play progressively and effectively its
role within the SNAP process through institutional support to its General
Secretariat and its organs through promoting the NDDCU to a general
Secretariat.
The logical framework could be described as follows:
i)- Immediate objectives:
Formalizing the new organizational chart (Fig. No. 1) for SNAP activities •
coordination, monitoring and evaluation.
Restructuring the NDDCU in order to promote it to a General Secretariat •
for HCCDDCP.
Building operating capacities of the General Secretariat (former NDDCU) •
and its organs in the fields of desertification monitoring indicators,
integrated information systems on environment and desertification, data
collection and processing, policy analysis,
Figure No. 1
Organization Structure of the HCCDDCP
Higher Council for Coordinating Drought
Secretariat
and Desertification Control Programmes
(HCCDDCP)
State Coordination Council
Project Coordination Council
27

--- Page 38 ---
Village D evelopment Council
Services Water Range Forestry Agriculture
Community base: farmers, laborers, Women, Youth, NGOs, CBOs
and Private Sector
capacity building, partnership promotion, resources mobilization and
funding, etc…
ii)- Expected outputs should include:
Effective built in capacity within HCCDDCP . •
Effective coordination and synergy between Rio conventions. •
Initiating an integrated information system on desertification. •
Improvement of decision-making processes with regard to natural •
resources management issues at federal and state levels.
A better-integrated approach towards sustainable development in •
desertification affected areas.
Substantial increase in desertification control activities at grassroots level. •
iii)- The programme activities include:
Training at relevant levels. •
Improvement and strengthening of communication channels. •
28

--- Page 39 ---
Supporting the HCCDDCP and its General Secretariat with required •
equipment.
Improvement and strengthening of infrastructure and premises. •
4.2. Programmes And Activities Related to Capacity Building And Human
Resources Development
Programmes under this group aim at:
Unifying environmental policies involving civil societies at state level •
through the provision of an integrated/holistic Environment Information
Systems.
Promoting environmental public awareness using popular and state of the •
art communication channels.
Enhancing scientific research in the field of environment at federal and •
state levels.
Introducing environmental education programmes in curricula courses at •
various levels, including scientific research outputs.
Extending and promoting the utilization of environmental sound •
intermediate technologies in rural areas.
Promoting and developing alternative renewable energy sources (bio- •
energy, solar energy, wind energy, etc…) as appropriate.
The specific objectives of these programmes aim at building national capacities
in various fields such as:
Environment policies. •
Extension and public awareness on environment. •
Scientific research on environmental issues. •
Environmental education issues. •
Intermediate technologies. •
Renewable energy sources. •
4.3. Programmes And Activities Related to Priority Programmes Areas at
State Levels
At State level the SNAP process identified rough but clear state programme
proposals covering the major aspects of desertification. However, these proposals
did not identify regarding programme priorities, or criteria to be adopted in order
to assess programme priorities within a given state. Nevertheless, these proposals
are to be considered as an appropriate pipeline for the implementation of the
SNAP taking into consideration the hypothetical scarcity of funding resources
and, the priority criteria.
29

--- Page 40 ---
In this regard a set of indicative criteria are proposed to be used when funding
resources are secured. In order to facilitate the use of an integrated approach
towards the preparation and implementation of these programmes. The proposed
criteria are based more on socio-special or socio-geographic consideration than
on sector. These criteria are:
Natural resources potentialities: the highest is the potential to be •
valorized or to be restored/protected; the highest is the priority to be
considered.
Scope of intensity of desertification processes. •
Demographic density. •
Dependency to rural employment: number of inhabitants for each •
employment when available.
Vicinity of an ADS or ARS or degree of complementation with any •
other former ongoing development activities.
Local socio-geographic balance and equity. •
4.4. Pilot Projects
Thirteen projects were selected among state priority programme areas, on the
basis of one project for each affected state, to serve as pilot projects. These
projects are summarized in (annex No. 2). The preparation and the
implementation of these projects are intended to:
initiate the implementation of the SNAP process through a learning •
implementation process.
give consistency to SNAP orientations and mechanisms. •
allow substantial feed-back for further refinement of SNAP components. •
4.5. Other Priorities Related to the Implementation of the UNCCD
4.5.1. Mainstreaming of the SNAP in the National Development Strategy
The National Comprehensive Strategy (NCS, 1992 – 2002) has laid, for the
first time, an environmental strategy for Sudan. The NCS has stipulated that
the environmental issues must be an integral part of the all-developmental
activities. The HCNR and the National Planning Council, supported by the
United Nations Division for Sustainable Development (UNDESA-DSD) held
a number of activities to draw a National Sustainable Development Strategy
for Sudan. This effort is reflected in the 25-year National Strategic Plan to
link desertification with poverty, food security and conservation of the
30

--- Page 41 ---
environment. The Government of Sudan is preparing an Interim Poverty
Reduction Strategy Paper (IPRSP), with technical assistance from the World
Bank and the United Nations Development Program (UNDP). The SNAP
should be a focal point for all these strategies which require a very high state
of political commitment and support.
4.5.2. Reform of Policies and Legislation
The current policies, especially in the agricultural sector, are increasing land
degradation and leading to impoverishment of the rural communities. This is
manifested in the expansion of crop cultivation even in marginal areas at the
expense of forests and rangeland. This should be tackled in a way that
balances the need for intensified crop production for food security and
increase the areas of forests and rangelands. A second issue is the crucial
issue of land tenure and land use. There is a clear need for a proper land use
plan that caters for the needs of all land users. A Third issue is the current
levels of governance (local, state and federal) which has generally adverse
effects on the natural resources of the country.
4.5.3. Establishment of the National Desertification Control Fund (NDF)
All the stakeholders are convinced of the establishment of a National
Desertification Fund (NDF). The current situation in Sudan is favourable
following the signature of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement and the
creation of the Multi Donor Trust Fund.
Capacity Building 4.5.4.
The state workshops carried out by the NDDCU has shown the need for
building capacities at states and localities levels. This applies equally to the
governmental and non-governmental organizations including the CBOs and
the women and youth organizations. At the federal level, the capacities of the
NDDCU as the focal point for the UNCCD in the country should be
strengthened to deal with the multitude of problems associated with
desertification and drought. In this regard the National Council for
Desertification is to be revitalized. This process will make use of the project
entitled : National Capacity Self Assessment Project (NCSA) in Sudan to
manage global environmental issues” which is currently under
implementation by HCENR. The objective of NCSA is to provide national
stakeholders the opportunity to articulate a thorough participatory self-
assessment and analysis of national capacity building needs, priorities and
constraints as set forth in the Rio conventions and related international
instruments. The NCSA will closely link to already planned/ongoing
31

--- Page 42 ---
activities, specifically through GEF funding and will compliment the activities
that were undertaken in context of the World Summit for Sustainable
Development (WSSD).
4.5.5. Awareness Raising and Partnerships
To develop necessary mechanisms to enhance and activate public
participation of CBOs, NGOs, private sector and local communities in all
phases of implementation of the SNAP, with specially on the involvement of
women, youth and administraters in the bottom-up approach.
4.5.6. Priority Projects Areas
Promotion environmental awareness among all parties at different levels. (cid:131)
Promotion and rational management of rural water sources through proper (cid:131)
distribution of water points, (hafirs) and boreholes.
(cid:131) Increasing the storage capacity of ground water through the construction of
dams, terraces, and water harvesting techniques.
(cid:131) Compilation of information and data on natural resources surveying, land
use mapping and establishing information bank.
(cid:131) Improvement and rehabilitation of degraded rangelands through reseeding,
nurseries, enclosures, and rehabilitation of vegetation cover especially in
the marginal areas between latitudes 10o and 18o N.
(cid:131) Development of forest cover and afforestation through dune fixation,
shelterbelts, community forests, enclosures and greening of public utilities
and rehabilitation of gum Arabic belt.
(cid:131) Concentration on vertical expansion of agricultural production to decrease
pressure on natural resources through integrated research programmes.
(cid:131) Capacity building, training and scientific research to support sectoral
institutions, academic, NGOs, public organizations, trade unions and land
committees in all affected local communities.
(cid:131) Protection of the Nile basin and its tributaries against gullying and sand
encroachment.
32

--- Page 43 ---
(cid:131) Promote and enhance poverty alleviation programmes through
encouraging alternative livelihoods, and enhancing the use of traditional
and intermediate technologies and rural industries.
(cid:131) Establishing group solutions for local communities in marketing and fund
mobilization.
(cid:131) Strengthening and activating policies and legislation and their executing
mechanisms to protect the environment and natural resources.
(cid:131) Conservation and development of wild life through enhancing care of the
national reserves and establishment of new reserves and forest areas to
protect the wild life and tourist villages with cooperation and coordination
of respective authorities.
(cid:131) Development and provision of energy alternatives and optimizing energy
use through use of biogas, solar and wind energy and utilizing of
agricultural residues, molasses blocks, electricity and expanding use of
improved stoves.
(cid:131) Preparation of comprehensive plans for drought preparedness, relief
management in drought periods, self-preparation in the affected and prone
areas, and ready programmes to receive refugees and displaced.
(cid:131) Establishment or creation of benchmarks and indicators to monitor the
progress in combating desertification.
(cid:131) Establishment of early warning system to monitor and enhance the
preparations for the drought spans.
(cid:131) Establishment of an endorsed roster of experts to the UNCCD secretariat
to be used when appropriate.
4.6. Traditional Knowledge
As far as traditional knowledge is concerned, the SNAP strategic orientations has
been based on the findings of the present situation and analyses with the
following characteristics:
• The high importance of traditional knowledge and practices creates the
need to apprehend and use traditional knowledge and practices in the field
of desertification.
33

--- Page 44 ---
• The coordination with local communities in the reproduction of traditional
knowledge and its sustainability.
• Traditional knowledge and practices cover all aspects of human life and
activities.
• Inspite of their importance, traditional knowledge and practices are
neither written nor referenced and sometimes too difficult to access.
4.7. Research on Desertification in Sudan
Recently, in February 2005, a committee of nine national experts chaired by
the manager of UNESCO Chair of Desertification Studies, affiliated to the
University of Khartoum, was mandated to put a plan of research for
desertification in Sudan. After seven meetings and many deliberations the
committee was finally able to draft a plan of research for clusters of similar
states. The research efforts and management are to be coordinated at the
national level. The principles and approach adopted towards formulating the
plan were based upon UNCCD Articles relevant to preparation of the SNAP.
Among the main features of the desertification research plan are the
following:
Review and documentation of relevant previous work. •
Imperativeness of database for identification of gaps. •
National, regional and international institutional linkages are vital. •
Making use of the NCS and the 25-year Strategy documents (irrespective •
of their status of approval).
Research should consider sustainable development. •
Emphasis should be put on efficient exploitation of fish resources. •
Change in underground water needs to be examined. •
It should be noted that Khartoum State is the only State in Sudan that is •
blessed with three rivers.
Salinity as one of the prominent problems of the State's soils and should •
have been given some emphasis in the paper.
Soil management, shelterbelts, water harvesting. •
Legislation is important in many aspects especially land use and tenure. •
Adoption of ecosystem approach. •
Sticking to UNESCO's classification of the ecological zones. •
Standardization of methodology used in development of the plan. •
The Plan formulated has to encompass all the states of the country. •
A separate a plan for each individual state might be difficult; clustering of •
similar states is more reasonable.
34

--- Page 45 ---
Distinction has to be made between sand movement (creep) and •
desertification.
Evaluation of traditional irrigation systems is important. •
Sand encroachment and salt-affected soils are identified as areas of •
research.
Gully erosion (Haddam) needs further investigation. •
Sud Merwi or Hamadab impacts on environment should be connected with •
the research.
The environmental impacts of Sud Merwi on Hod El Silaim need to be •
evaluated.
Identifying three separate environments in the northern states of the •
country:
Nuba Lake; -
Oases; and -
Wadies. -
References
Andrews, F.W, (1950-1960) The Flowering of the Anglo-Egyptian Sudan,
Vol. 1 (1950). Vol. II (1952) Vol. III (1956), Buncle, Arboath
Babiker, I.A. el Mustafa, M.A. Salih E.M. (1992) Desertification Assessment
and Mapping Methodology in Sudan (NDDU).
35

--- Page 46 ---
Badi, Kamal Hassan (1999). Protection against fire in the low rainfall savanna
region of the Sudan, Sudan Silva No. 28 Vol. III, 1999, Khartoum.
DANIDA (1989) Environmental Profile, the Sudan Department of
International Cooperation, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Copenhagen,
Denmark.
Department of Statistics, Census Office (1995) Sudan Fourth Population
Census 1993, Final tabulations, Sudan – Northern States. Vol. I Demographic
Characteristics.
Desert Encroachment Control and Rehabilitation Program (DECARP), (1976).
Elamin, H.M. (1990) Trees and Shrubs of the Sudan, Ithaca Press, Extrer.
El-Khalifa, M.D. and H.O. Abel Nour (Eds). (1991): Republic of Sudan
National Report. United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development, Brazil
FAO, FNC (1995): FAO and Forestry Corporation Study (1995), Khartoum,
Sudan.
FNC (1995). Forest Products Consumption Survey in the Sudan, Summary of
findings, FNC, Khartoum.
FNC (2001). The Forests of the Sudan in hundred years, 1902-2002, FNC and
the Arab Organization for Agricultural Development, Khartoum (in Arabic).
Fourth Population Census of Sudan 1993: Final Tabulation, Vol. I, Central
Bureau of Statistics Khartoum, 1995.
Guidelines of the National Plan for Combating Drought and Desertification
(NDDU) 1991.
Harrison. N.M. and J.K. Jackson (1958) Ecological Classification of the
Vegetation of the Sudan. Forest Department, Bull. No. 2, New Series –
Khartoum.
Hillman, J.C. (1985). Wildlife Research in the Sudan in relation to
Conservation and Management Seminar on Wildlife conservation and
36

--- Page 47 ---
management in the Sudan. In: Dieter E. (Ed), Wildlife conservation Forces
and the German Agency for Technical Cooperation (GTZ) Khartoum, Sudan.
Ibrahim, F.N. (1984) Ecological Imbalance in the Republic of the Sudan with
Reference to Desertification in Darfur, El Fashir.
Ministry of Agriculture, (1985) Proposed National Plan for Combating
Drought Effects and Desertification, Khartoum, Sudan.
Mudawi, Abdel Wahab Ali, and Siddig, Kamal El Hag (1995) Population
Distribution in the Sudan. Fourth Population Census of Sudan Advance
Census Results, 1993, Central Bureau of Statistics, Khartoum, Sudan.
NDDCU (1985). Proposed National Plan for Combating Drought Effects and
Desertification (1985).
NDDCU (1993). Sudan Five Year Program for INCD (1993).
NDDCU (1993). Sudan National Case Study on Drought and Desertification for
(INCD), 1993.
NDDCU (1994). Technical Notes on Maps and database.
Ramsis, H. Salama (1976) Ground Water Resources of Sudan, Rural Water
Corporation Report.
Salih, E.M. (1995) The Geographical Extent of Desertification in the Sudan.
Stebbing, E,P. (1932). The Creeping Desert in the Sudan and Elsewhere in
Africa between 13ْ & 15ْ latitudes, Forest Department Khartoum.
Sudan National Comprehensive Strategy (SNCS) 1992-2002: Sudan National
Comprehensive Strategy 1 Section 14 page 101.
Tolba, M.K. and O.A. ElKholy (Eds.) 1992. The world Environment (1972-
1992) UNEP.
UN Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing
Drought and/or Desertification Particularly in Africa, 1997.
37

--- Page 48 ---
UNDP 1992: A report of Integrated Rural Development in Sudan.
UNICEF 1996: Situation Analysis of Children and Women in the Sudan,
Khartoum, UNICEF Head Office.
UNSO 1979: Assessment of the Problem of Desertification in Sudan.
World Bank (1986). Sudan Forest Sector Review. The World Bank,
Washington.
World Resources Institute UNEP/UNDP 1994, People and Environment.
Oxford University Press.
World Bank Operational Manual (1994), Operational Directive OD 4.02
Environmental Action Plan Annex a World Bank Publications.
ﺔﻴﺑﺮﻌﻟا ﺔﻐﻠﻟﺎﺑ ﻊﺟاﺮﻤﻟا
.1994 A/AC/241/27 ﺔﻴﻟوﺪﻟا ﺔﻴﻗﺎﻔﺗﻹا -
ﺔ(cid:1127)(cid:1127)ﻳرﻮﻬﻤﺟ ﻲ(cid:1127)(cid:1127)ﻓ ﺮﺤ(cid:1127)(cid:1127)ﺼﺘﻟا ﺔ(cid:1127)(cid:1127)ﺤﻓﺎﻜﻤﻟ ﻲ(cid:1127)(cid:1127)ﻨﻃﻮﻟا ﺞﻣﺎﻧﺮﺒ(cid:1127)(cid:1127)ﻟا /ﺔﻴ(cid:1127)(cid:1127)ﻋارﺰﻟا ﺔﻴ(cid:1127)(cid:1127)ﻤﻨﺘﻠﻟ ﺔﻴ(cid:1127)(cid:1127)ﺑﺮﻌﻟا ﺔﻤﻈﻨ(cid:1127)(cid:1127)ﻤﻟا -
.2002 (نﺎﺴﻴﻧ) ﻞﻳﺮﺑأ / مﻮﻃﺮﺨﻟا /نادﻮﺴﻟا
ﻰ(cid:1127)(cid:1127)ﻠﻋﻷا ﺲ(cid:1127)(cid:1127)ﻠﺠﻤﻟا ،نادﻮ(cid:1127)(cid:1127)ﺴﻟا ﻲ(cid:1127)(cid:1127)ﻓ ﻲ(cid:1127)(cid:1127)ﺌﻴﺒﻟا ﻞ(cid:1127)(cid:1127)ﻤﻌﻠﻟ ﺔﻴ(cid:1127)(cid:1127)ﻣﻮﻗ ﺔ(cid:1127)(cid:1127)ﻄﺧ ﻮ(cid:1127)(cid:1127)ﺤﻧ /نوﺮ(cid:1127)(cid:1127)ﺧﺁو راﺮ(cid:1127)(cid:1127)آ ﺮ(cid:1127)(cid:1127)ﻔﻌﺟ -
ﺔﻤﻈﻨ(cid:1127)(cid:1127)(cid:1127)ﻣ ﻊ(cid:1127)(cid:1127)(cid:1127)ﻣ نوﺎﻌﺘ(cid:1127)(cid:1127)(cid:1127)ﻟﺎﺑ ﺔﺌ(cid:1127)(cid:1127)(cid:1127)ﻴﺒﻟا ﺔ(cid:1127)(cid:1127)(cid:1127)ﻳﺎﻤﺤﻟ ﺔﻴﻧادﻮ(cid:1127)(cid:1127)(cid:1127)ﺴﻟا ﺔﻴ(cid:1127)(cid:1127)(cid:1127)ﻌﻤﺠﻟ ،ﺔﻴ(cid:1127)(cid:1127)(cid:1127)ﻌﻴﺒﻄﻟا دراﻮ(cid:1127)(cid:1127)(cid:1127)ﻤﻟاو ﺔﺌ(cid:1127)(cid:1127)(cid:1127)ﻴﺒﻠﻟ
.1996 ﺔﻴﻧﺎﻤﻟﻷا تﺮﺒﻳأ ﺶﻳرﺪﻳﺮﻓ
ﺔﺌ(cid:1127)(cid:1127)ﻴﺒﻟﺎﺑ ءﺎ(cid:1127)(cid:1127)ﻘﺗرﻹا ﻞ(cid:1127)(cid:1127)ﻤﻋ ﺔ(cid:1127)(cid:1127)ﺷرو ،ﺔﻳرﺎ(cid:1127)(cid:1127)ﻀﺤﻟا ﺔﺌ(cid:1127)(cid:1127)ﻴﺒﻟا :ضﻮ(cid:1127)(cid:1127)ﻋ ﺪ(cid:1127)(cid:1127)ﻤﺤﻣ ردﺎ(cid:1127)(cid:1127)ﻧو ﷲا ﺪﺒ(cid:1127)(cid:1127)ﻋ بﻮ(cid:1127)(cid:1127)ﻘﻌﻳ -
م1995 نﺎﻜﺴﻠﻟ ﻲﻣﻮﻘﻟا ﺲﻠﺠﻤﻟا ،ﺔﻳﺮﻀﺤﻟا
38

--- Page 49 ---
39

--- Page 50 ---
Annex No.2
Selected States Pilot Projects
Annex No. 2 – (1)
State: Red Sea
Locality: Olib
Objectives Activities Participation Expected output Indicators for output
Gov Com Oth assessment
Combat desertification (cid:131) Management of grazing (cid:131) Cultivation of an area of • The quantity of seeds •
and mitigate drought areas. 5900 feddans with collected.
effects. Collection of seasonal seeds (cid:131) sorghum and vegetables. The managed •
Establish effective (cid:131) of grasses, shrubs, and trees. Rehabilitation of forests • irrigable areas in
water management. Provision of needed spp. (cid:131) in 43600 feddans. feddans.
Provide adequate food (cid:131) Certified seeds quality. (cid:131) Improvement of range • Establishment of •
production. Irrigation management. (cid:131) and pasture in 80220 nurseries.
Rehabilitation of (cid:131) Moisture regulation. (cid:131) X X X feddans area. The quantity of •
natural resources. Seed propagation. (cid:131)
stored water.
Ensure community (cid:131) Water storage. (cid:131)
Cultivated areas in •
participation in Nurseries. (cid:131)
feddans.
sustainable
Forest stand area. •
development.
Improved range and •
Provide technical (cid:131)
appearance of
training in environment
palatable spp.
management.
Number of trained •
Use of intermediate (cid:131)
people and degree of
technology to establish
community
reliable land use.
participation.
Control gully erosion. (cid:131)
Gov = Government Com = Community Oth = Others
Annex No. 2 – (2)

--- Page 51 ---
State: Gezira
Locality: Abu Quta
Objectives Activities Participation Expected outputs Indicators for output
Gov Com Oth assessment
Environmental • Environmental awareness • Training of 36 of • Increase of •
awareness raising campaign. technicians in vegetation cover
Wind breaks • Planting shelterbelts and • combating area.
establishment community forests. desertification. Extent of •
Increase of natural • Terass cultivation, water- • Training of 90 persons • alternative energy
pasture and harvesting techniques by X X X from local using.
vegetative cover. ridges and furrows. communities on Situation of •
Establishment of • Increase of rangelands. • desertification control vegetation cover in
community forests Use of alternative energy. • techniques. water spreading
Sand dunes fixation • Sand dune fixation. • areas.
Training of staff and • Increase of grass •
community members. and range land
cover in area wise.
Sand dunes fixed. •
Number of trained •
people, CBOs
leaders and
technicians.
Gov = Government Com = Community Oth = Others
41

--- Page 52 ---
Annex No. 2 – (3)
State: Northern
Locality: Eddebba
Objectives Activities Participation Expected outputs Indicators for output
Gov Com Oth assessment
Soil conservation in • Handcrafts establishment. • Shelterbelts and Number of •
the proposed project. Community awareness. • windbreaks. nurseries,
Village tree planting. • Staff training and CBOs • Improved soil distributed
Training. • training at the village X X X management. seedlings and
level. Training and community shelterbelts
Nursery establishment. • awareness. established.
Planting shelterbelts and • Number of trees •
wind breaks length of 40 planted in the
km. villages.
Degree of soil •
stability.
Extend of •
community
participation and
awareness.
Number of trained •
people.
Gov = Government Com = Community Oth = Others
42

--- Page 53 ---
Annex No. 2 – (4)
State: Gedarif
Locality: Subagh
Objectives Activities Participation Expected output Indicators for output
Gov Co Oth assessment
m
Combating and stopping • Rehabilitation of pasture • Increased vegetation • Vegetation cover •
desertification. and tree cover. cover. situation.
Rehabilitation of vegetation • Seed production and • Increased good • Appearance of •
cover. distribution in an area of rangeland. palatable species.
Increase of palatable species • 500 feddans. X X X Smooth animal passage • Number of trained •
for animal feed. corridor (Roots). people and degree of
Control of animal routes of • Sand dunes fixation. • community
movements. participation.
Enlighten the pastorals in • Measurement of soil •
the field of soil conservation erodibility before and
as pets and vegetation cover. after
Gov = Government Com = Community Oth = Others
43

--- Page 54 ---
Annex No. 2 – (5)
State: Khartoum
Locality: Wadi el Mugaddam
Objectives Activities Participation Expected output Indicators for output
Gov Com Oth assessment
Cropping of 30 • Digging boreholes in • Cropping of 30 feddans in Bohat • Cropped areas and •
feddans in Bohat area Bohat village. area with vegetables and winter number of established
with vegetables and Installation of the well • pulses. social forests in each
winter pulses. in Funga el Zariab and Establishment of socisl forests. • location.
Planting social forests • Warat el Bagar. Cropping of 20 feddans in Funga • Area of reserved •
and rehabilitation of Rehabilitation of earth • area with vegetables and winter rangeland.
rangeland in Funga dam in Abu Ushar. pulses. Number of •
area. Establishment of earth • X X X Cropping of 30 feddans in • established or
Cropping of fodder • dam on Medaisees Ziraiab area with vegetables and rehabilitated earth
and winter pulses in wadi. winter pulses. dams.
Ziraiab area. Cropping of 10 feddans in Warat • Extent of community •
Planting social forest • el Bagar area with vegetables participation.
in Warat el Bagar area. and winter pulses.
Increase rangelands in • 500 Feddans natural rangelands •
Wadi Abu Ushar. and forests in Wadi Abu Ushar.
Increase rangelands in • 300 Feddans natural rangelands •
Mahmeila in Mehaimeela.
44

--- Page 55 ---
Gov = Government Com = Community Oth = Others
Annex No. 2 – (6)
State: Sennar
Locality: Singa Rural Area
Objectives Activities Participation Expected output Indicators for output
Gov Com Oth assessment
Increase environmental • Seed distribution • Boreholes maintenance. • Number of •
awareness. of range plants. Upgrading of range areas by • maintained boreholes.
Find new alternative • Establishment of • seed distribution. Quality and quantity •
methods of livelihood. nurseries. Establishment of the nursery and • of rangelands
Improve potable water. • Establishment of • the farm. Number of trained •
Link the people with their • experimental Establishment of the training and • people and degree of
environment. farms. extension cntre. community
Conservation and • Boreholes • X X X participation.
rehabilitation of vegetation maintenance. Number of •
cover. established nurseries
Stop migration and increase • and distributed
animal production. seedlings.
Provide education and •
health services and training
on handicraft production in
addition to women
education and removing
illiteracy.
Gov = Government Com = Community Oth = Others
45

--- Page 56 ---
Annex No. 2 – (7)
State: Northern darfur
Locality: Dar Assalam
Objectives Activities Participation Expected output Indicators for output
Gov Com Oth assessment
Mitigate the effect of • Rehabilitation of • Rehabilitation of vegetation • Extent and success of •
drought, desertification tree cover. cover. hashab and millet in
control and poverty Water harvesting • Establishment of shelterbelts and • Qoz soils.
alleviation. techniques. windbreaks around the villages. Number of seedlings •
Upgrading of pasture. • Training on • Cultivation of Wadis. • planted around
Training in the field of • optimizing the Introduction of mixed • villages.
combating desertification. available X X X cultivation. Evaluation of earth •
Encouraging of community • biomass. Introduction of solar energy as • dams experience for
participation and cpacity Focus on planting • an alternative energy. water harvesting.
building. indigenous quick Increase of per capita •
Encourage clay soil • maturing species income.
cultivation instead of Qoz to combat Extend of vegetation •
lands. desertification. cover and success of
Elight the negative impacts • quick maturing
of the arbitrary allocation of varieties.
water points. Number of trained •
Link people with their • people and degree of
environment for sustainable community
development. participation.
Gov = Government Com = Community Oth = Others
46

--- Page 57 ---
Annex No. 2 – (8)
State: Northern Kordofan
Locality: Lagawa
Objectives Activities Participation Expected outputs Indicators for output
Gov Com Oth assessment
Rehabilitation of • Production of seedlings. • Production of 250 000 • Improvement of •
vegetation cover by Training water • seedling of some soil moisture.
using water harvesting techniques. indigenous species. Extent of •
harvesting Establishment and • Establishment of 100 • vegetation cover.
techniques. production of improved feddans reserves. Quality and •
Introduction and • stoves X X X Training of 50 persons • quantity of
making of improved Extension and awareness • in environmental produced stoves.
stoves. campaigns. awareness. Number of trained •
Encourage the • Training of 100 • persons and CBOs
community persons in making leaders.
participation. improved stoves.
3X3 m wood lots in 5 •
villages.
Gov = Government Com = Community Oth = Others
47

--- Page 58 ---
Annex No. 2 (9)
State: Western Darfur
Locality: Kerainik
Objectives Activities Participation Expected outputs Indicators for output
Gov Com Oth assessment
Rehabilitation of forestry • Survey the affected • Production of 300 • Increased forest •
and refugees nurseries in farms. 000 Acacia (cid:31)enegal cover.
Genaina. Rehabilitation of • seedlings. Gum Arabic belt •
Rehabilitation of Acacia • forestry nurseries. Planting of seedlings. • rehabilitated area.
(cid:31)enegal belts. Seedlings production. • Increase • Number of •
Introducing of Acacia • Training workshops. • X X X environmental established nurseries
(cid:31)enegal belts in sandy awareness. and seedlings
areas. Training of 150 • produced.
Training in nurseries • producers on Degree of •
administration and seedling preparation, community
execution of agricultural planting and nursing. participation and
programmes. awareness and
Natural resources • number of trained
rational use. people.
Extent and success •
of Hashab tree in
Qoz soils.
Gov = Government Com = Community Oth = Others
48

--- Page 59 ---
Annex No. 2 – (10)
State: Western Kordofan
Locality: Khuai – Wad Banda
Objectives Activities Participation Expected outputs Indicators for output
Gov Com Oth assessment
Soil conservation. • Rehabilitation of gum • Rehabilitation of 250 • Degree of increased •
Rehabilitation of gum • Arabic belts. 000 feddans of gum vegetation covers
Arabic belts. Increased of desert • Arabic belt. and rangelands.
Development of stoves. • sheep number. Developed storage •
Production of water • Development of • X X X facilities and
melon seeds. storage facilities. introduction of new
Rehabilitation of animal • Production of water • techniques and
herds. melon in Qoz soils. number of water
points provided.
Conserved soils and •
erodability.
Extent of •
rehabilitation of
gum Arabic belt.
Extent of sand •
dunes.
Gov = Government Com = Community Oth = Others
49

--- Page 60 ---
Annex No. 2 – (11)
State: Kassala
Locality: Kassala Rural Area
Objectives Activities Participation Expected outputs Indicators for output
Gov Com Oth assessment
To apply agricultural • Land preparation. • A 10 000 m3 teras. • Evaluating the •
production. Teras construction. • Measuring soil • effectiveness of
Use of teras cultivation • Use of crop residues • moisture after each dams in increasing
to increase production. for animal feed. rain shower. soil moisture.
Increase relative • Control gully and • Planting 1000 • Productivity can be •
humidity of dry soils by sheet erosion. feddans cultivated by measured by
water harvesting. Increased of desert • X X X water harvesting. sacks/feddan
Increase community • sheep number. Increase of • Conserved soils and •
participation. Development of • production from 2 to erodability.
Use of crop residues for • storage facilities. 4 sack/feddan. Extent of community •
animal feed. Planting shade trees. • participation.
Control gully and sheet • Training. •
erosion.
Planting shade trees. •
Enhancement of •
community income.
Training. •
Gov = Government Com = Community Oth = Others
50

--- Page 61 ---
Annex No. 2 – (12)
State: White Nile
Locality: Giuly
Objectives Activities Participation Expected output Indicators for output
Gov Com Oth assessment
Establishment of nurseries. • Reserved areas. • Fencing 50 feddans as reserved • Sand dunes fixation. •
Establishment of • Preservation of 50 • area. Increased awareness •
windbreaks around the feddans in Surait Sand fixation in 4 feddans area. • and number of
villages to stop sand dunes area. Planting 2000 seedlings in each • trained people.
movement. Sand dunes • farm. Preserved areas size •
Staff and CBOs training. • fixation around X X X and fenced areas.
Protection of villages and • four villages. Increase vegetation •
agricultural lands against Training of • cover.
sand movements. technicians. Number of successful •
Enhancing capacity building • seedlings by each
among rural people and farmer.
technicians. Number of trained •
people and degree of
community
participation.
Gov = Government Com = Community Oth = Others
51

--- Page 62 ---
Annex No. 2 – (13)
State: River Nile
Locality: Berber
Objectives Activities Participation Expected output Indicators for output
Gov Com Oth assessment
Combating desertification • Planting of • Planting 6000 seedlings on an • Number of nurseries •
and protection of the multiple-benefits area of 15 km2. established.
irrigation pumps. trees on a 15km2 Number of seedlings •
To avail farmers required • area. X X X produced by farmers
equipment. trained people.
Trees over-cutting • Windbreaks and •
alleviation. shelterbelts
To avail shadow and • established.
fodders. Increase vegetation •
To avail the right • cover.
environment for agricultural Sand dunes fixation. •
crops and increasing the
agricultural production.
To protect Alebaidiya •
villages.
Gov = Government Com = Community Oth = Others
52

--- Page 63 ---
Annex No. 3
Names and Specialization of the Taskforce team
No. Name Specialization Status
1. Prof. Ibrahim Ahmed Babiker Soil Scientist Team
Leader
2. Prof. Mukhtar Ahmed Mustafa Soil Scientist Member
3. Dr. El Tigani M. Salih Soil Scientist Member
4. Dr. Mahgoub Zaroug Pasture Specialist Member
5. Mr. Mohamed Fadl el Mula Pasture Specialist Member
6. Mr. Adil Mohamed Ali Community/NGOs Member
7. Mr. Yousif Yaagoub Remote Sensing Member
Specialist
8. Mr. El Tayeb A. Abdalla Forestry Member
9. Mr. Kamil Osman M. El Hag Environmentalist/ Member
National Project
Coordinator
10. Ms. Fathia Salih Mousa Environmentalist/ Member
Socioeconomist

--- Page 64 ---
Annex No. 4
The Committee to review and prepare the NAP
No. Name Status
1. Mr. Abd El Gabbar Hussein Supervisor
2. Mr. Salahaddeen Abdalla Alebaid Team Leader
3. Prof. Mukhtar Ahmed Mustafa Member
4. Prof. Ibrahim Ahmed Babiker Member
5. Dr. Gaafar Karrar Fadul Member
6. Dr. Nadir Mohamed Awad Member
7. Dr. El Tigani Mohamed Salih Member
8. Dr. Mutasim Basheer Nimir Member
9. Dr. Ahmed Suliman El Wakeel Member
10. Dr. Izzat Mirgani Taha Member
11. Ms. Fathia Salih Mousa Member
12. Mr. Adil Mohamed Ali Member
13. Mr. Malik Abu Sin Member
14. Mr. Kamal hassan Badi Member
15. Ms. Fatima Shoeib Member
53

--- Page 65 ---
Annex No. 5
Funds allocated from the United Nations Agencies
No. Agency Amount in US$
1. United Nations development Programme 60 000
2. Office to Combat Desertification and 160 000
Drought (UNSO) (UNDP)
54